Aa
á pron. à pron. àa excl.
aan excl. àabà n àbà n Àbá p.n. ábá v
àbàbá v. n 2
àbàchúayé n ábágálá v ábágo n ábàín n
n àbàjì n àbàjìbàràbà n àbàjiọ`$kpọ n àbàjìpálì n àbàjô n
ábáká n
n Àbàkú p.n.
àbàkùá v àbàla v.a. ábálálá n Ábàm p.n.
àbàná n àbárà n àbàràká n ábàtúm$gbèlè n
Ábè`$ p.n àbî n
ábìlì n àbíntú n àbò a. ábònìá n àbónímá-sáịdà n
SF
f
f
f f
fm
fm f
English gloss
vowel, the first letter of the Okrika alphabet
she
I
exclamatory expression; also a feeling of tolerance or acceptance, stress
yes (in response)
hammer-headed shark, Sphyrna spp. probably Sphyrna lewini shoulder, also àbâ
town in Imo State
to weave in a continuous process, round and round as when laying the cross bars on a fish-racket (kasa)
to lift or carry someone on the shoulders firmly
idiomatically applied to mean helping someone financially or economically
vaccination affected on part of the body, esp. on the shoulder
to paint around esp. the eye, thus tọrụ abagala
fish sp. (also = étèté)
red or white mud used in building
large mangrove bird
wide sea or ocean
sting-ray, Dasyatis margarita. cf. also síká
nickname for gari (coined
whale
boundary area, borderline, between Asakụra (Onne) and Nunju's village
club of singers in Adedeme Biri, inaugurated in the first decade of the twentieth century later degenerated to youthful inheritors
climbing stem used as twine in tying water-fence (chụa)
family in Okrika living in Biri and A.T.C. Road
to shudder with the expressive demonstration of raising the shoulders to advise with caution
white drill; any whitish material
family in Okrika abound at Ambeme Biri. Chief Abam's proper native name was Dikisịkịboka
mudfish found in the swampy mud (lèlà)
bluff, assertion; making a exaggerated outward show
dregs in water or liquid
name given to any dangerous club, commonly used in murderous acts or fight
popular joker of Jama house in Okrika
manila an old currency used in Okrika, replaced by the metallic coins of penny and shilling
game, like chess, played by two on a draughts board also èpèlè
manila currency
white, referring to white chicken
large mudfish in the swampy creeks, mostly used as bait in angling nickname for gari (changed from sawdust) coined by the labourers who worked in the first sawmill at Degema under the U.A.C.
f
1
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS Àbújá p.n
Àbùlómà p.n.
àchàkàrà n àchàrà n áchí n
áchíríbám n àchó n ádà n.
n àdà n
àdá n Ádà p.n. ádáịn n Ádáịn p.n. àdàín n àdáka n ádálà n Ádédémé 'Biri p.n. Àdô p.n. ádo n Àdókì p.n. ádùa n adùmú n Áfàm n áfárí n áfìná n áfò n áfògònò n áfónò n áfòtíbì n àfùrùkpà n
ága n ágá n ágábá n àgàdá n
àgàga a.
àgàgá n àgàgàmgbe n àgàlá a.
ágàlágà n
àgàmà-gbàsà n àgàm-gàm n àgàm;ìpòlì n ágánágàná n
SF
English gloss
capital territory of Nigeria
town in Okrika division situated at the mainland near Port Harcourt. It is bilingual.
nickname given to a smart swift runner
tall grasses; elephant grass (<Igbo)
cooking material or ingredient, yellowish in colour and in powder form used in making soup thick (<Igbo)
venereal disease
way, cause, road, reason, solution
referring to a father
the style of address a son or daughter makes to a father in Ogu
dance, thus ada'kụa (its drum), ada-owu or pamba-owu (its masquerade)
first female child; first-born daughter
family in Okrika, living in Adedeme Biri
beetle
family in Okrika, living in Awoọlọme Biri
first female child, first daughter (Ogu dialect)
crawcraw, scabies
comb
ward or an occupied area in Okrika
king and family in Okrika
title addressed to the wife of a man by his sisters and female relatives family in Okrika, living in Edereme Biri
help; helper; defence; defender, protection; favourite
water mermaid like a boa constrictor
name of the town where NEPA power station is situated in OTELGA herring; flat sardine
food made out of cassava commonly known as kpokpo-gari
main road
on the street or main road, a straight
wife-mate; a rival
on the main road or street, straight looking road
lies or formed stories (usually accompanied with the phrase, afurukpa temi i.e. blowing lies)
catfish, probably the sea catfish, Arius spp.
cane for making basket, chairs, furniture and fishing traps
masquerade
forked stick used in the fishing boat to support or suspend nets while removing the catch from the net
not too big, not too small, sizeable (usually referred to such as yam, cocoyam, maize, etc)
side of the human body
side bones, ribs
equal formation; bracketing as of racing, sporting, grading; drawn on equal strength
canopy built in canoe with supporting sticks, generally used by fish and food traders on sea m$bòtò
straight mangrove sticks generally used as wall-fence
male lizard
lobster also called kpaikpai (see kpaịkpaị)
flat oblong tray knit of mangrove, generally used in spreading fish on
fm fm
fm
f
f
f
2
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
àgì n àgịdí n àgìjì n àgìjì-òwú n àgìlí n ágílì n àgìpèkérè n àgírì n àgìrbà n ágìrígà n
ágógò n Àgùdà n àgùgà n
àgùrù n n ágúrú n àgbà n ágbá1 n ágbá2 n ágba v ágbaba n ágbábílé v Àgbà Biri n àgbádá n àgbàgbá n àgbàgbà n
ágbálágbala a. àgbàmịě-àlàlí n àgbàmì;é-èb;é n àgbàmìẹbó n ágbákúrú n
àgbàn;ì n àgbànìchùá v
àgbàrá n ágbọ n àhúekéré n ájálà n ájárí n áj'ríchúa v àjíbùlù n àjìmínà n ájìrìmâ n àjísàkà n ájúkújúkú n ákā n
SF
ms f
English gloss
for curing or selecting etc.
rag (obs.)
solidified pap (<Yor.)
machete; cutlass
masquerade that chases with sword
fish like perch found in fresh water and streams bullets; iron balls used in shooting
old filthy piece of cloth lying about
ancient masquerade
drum used to accompany other drums in modulation
behaviour that causes rough encounter, wickedness, stubbornness, a behaviour not conducive to co-operation (<Igbo)
namesake
town in Rivers State (YELGA)
goggle eyes, terrifying and shining eyes, when wide open to frighten someone
potassium bromide
frightening look effected by goggling the eyes
water-termite found in the empty shell of shellfish
sacrifice, charm
paint
deep fishing ground
to anchor, to get affixed to another boat; to approach
snake; a deity ascribed to Ogu town by its ancestral parents
to fish by diving especially from the holes of water-cliffs (agba-kuru) ward or an occupied area in Okrika
flowing gown (<Yor.)
bamboo stick got from raffia palm
side used only when prefixed to other words e.g. bulo-agbagba (side of the human body), wari agbagba (walls of a house)
incidental; not very real; within reach; unimportant; immaterial sacrificial feasts, harvest festivities
altar of sacrifice
one who offers the sacrifice in a religious group; priest
cliff-like growth inside the water in creeks, containing holes in which fishes hide
oblong basket-tray with raised edges, made of cane, commonly used in carrying yams, cocoyams and market products
to make a sumptuous presentation to mark a special event, e.g. during iria ceremony, etc.
red snapper, Lutjanus agennes (also sóró)
shield
groundnuts (<Igbo) also barambi
dangerous snake, fond of attacking fowls
rust
to be rusty
traditional headgear used by the wealthy on special occasions castrated male sheep
uncastrated male sheep, ram
whirlwind
masquerade built of raffia material whose tassels dangle around palm-frond of the water palms with thorns
f
f
ms
3
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
áká n àkà n Ákâ excl. àkàdìèín n ákáfárí n.v ákáfían n Ákáii excl. ákáịn n àkáīn n ákákà n àkàkàmà a.,
adv. àkàkàmàchùa v àkàkánjà n
n ákákàrá n
àkàkàràbà n àkàlú n n
Àkàlúogbó p.n. àkàmà n ákámáká n ákámákámá n ákámbúló n
ákámèrè n àkàmú n ákángá n
àkàngàrà n àkángō n àkànìbǒ n àkàrà n àkàrìkpò p.n.
ákásíkì n ákáàlàlà n ákíámā n ákíárā n àkìrí n ákíríkírí n ákísì n ákō n ákòm(u) n àkpà n àkpàká n ákpákpá n àkpàkùrù n
SF
English gloss
tooth
art; tact
expression of pain
strategy
gnashing of teeth; to grind one's teeth together
child's faeces when teething
exclamation of pain when someone gets injured suddenly thatch made from raffia palm fronds
bitter kola also garagara (Ogu dialect <Ogoni)
side, brim
tactful, diplomatic, artful
to apply art or diplomacy in behaviour or expression nickname for manila currency
person with scarified face, ichi
carved teeth (an old fashion adopted by some parts of Ogoni, perforating the set of teeth)
white ant, termite
moon
month
family in Okrika, living mostly in Awolome Biri wasp, stinging bees
popular large talking drum with bass tone, usually standing fishing bird very commonly seen in the open sea
sluggish crab with whitish stomach, red fingers, and dark back, commonly found in the mangroves
nickname for locally distilled gin (<Igbo)
pap made from maize (<Yor)
West African fiddler crab, Uca tangeri. Crab generally found in holes bored in the mud of swamp or sand banks.
straw hat
skeleton; dried body, human body that has lost flesh
carpenter, trickster
fried balls of ground beans
rascally masquerade that usually plays to the rhythm of a sophisticated drumming, owned by the Jama family in Okrika. It is believed that when akarikpo is out, strife is imminent, because the drumming stirs beholders to action.
edge, brim
fishing bird
seabird, tern
bird commonly found in creeks
tiny frog commonly eaten by some people
fish sp.
handkerchief, a yard of cloth
hook; idiomatically used to mean hitch in any progressive affair ailment, fever
bag, dirt, pocket
shoe
grasshopper
decomposed cassava sifted into condensed powder and prepared as fufu for food
fm
c
c
ms
f
4
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench Kịrịkẹ PoS SF
English gloss
àkpángā n
àkpárà nf
style of plaiting the hair into single long hair twines, also a style of headgear of wide spread cloth fashion usually with a fathom or more chained food material e.g., pieces of meat or small fishes like ịchịla (mud-skipper) or abana (mudfish) etc.
tick, usually found on cows and lama
unripe fruit; not sweet
basket of stitched raffia-woven rings (Hausa product)
strong plant (tree) producing strong inedible seeds used in playing strong and tough man (<Igbo)
thick woollen wear, usually worn during fishing to guard against cold (akpụrụka-bùchụaye)
sweater, thick garment for cold
billows; high waves
bitter
drum
set of drums
to play or beat drum
one who plays or beats various styles and types of drum; a drummer special cloth woven by the people of Akwete of Imo State; also named akuete (<Igbo)
bitter mind or hatred, characterized by intense animosity
wild ants; soldier ants
special walking stick, also amgbara
harlotry; prostitution
harlot, prostitute, promiscuous woman, whore, tart
large talking or call-drum for occasions
to make bitter
special cloth woven by the people of Akwete
largest of the set of drums in display, having deep bass tone
town in Imo State, famous for cloth weaving
family in Okrika living in Agba Biri
wealth, riches, richness, chieftaincy
salt water
growth of flesh by the side of the stomach
bedbug
measles on the skin of human beings
chief, wealthy man, ruler
temporary white marks on the skin caused by salt water stain
eaves of a building (usually prefixed with the word "wari" thus wari- alaga
gun
ancient masquerade
funnel used in conveying liquid from one container into another
to become rich; to acquire wealth
period of merriment and jubilation, e.g. Christmas; merry-making
Y ule-tide; Christmas season
special seat of respect meant for men of high rank, usually placed conspicuously in a parlour; also ascribed to heavenly throne; modern foam for òmìnè
family in Okrika, living in Ngeme Biri
small flat fish, resembling the sole
bronze; brass metal
àkpí n ákpó a. ákpú n ákú n ákpùká n àkpùrùká n
àkpùtú n àkù n ákū a. ákúá n ákúachírí n ákúafárí v ákúafáríbǒ n ákùamírí n
áū-kúbìe n ákúkúbìlákì n àkùlà n àkùlàkúlà n àakùlàkúlábò$ n àkùmà n ákúmà v àkúetè n àkùsà n Àkwétè p.n. Álá p.n.
n àlà n àlàbá n àlàbàmbám n àlàbìrìká n álábǒ n àlàfón n álágà n
àlágbā n àlàgbà n àlàkàláká n álákón v álálí n álálísíkì n álángádà n
fm
fm àlàpámpām nf
Álángíbì p.n. àlàpéléká n
5
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench Kịrịkẹ PoS SF
English gloss
àlàpéléká-ákpátà n álápónìa n álápú n álápúínjī n álásómá v
Álátórū p.n. áláwáríbùrù- n àpùrà
àlègé n
Àlàgé p.n. àlèlèyà p.n. álī a. Álī p.n. Álíbì p.n. álílí n álínjì n álú n àmà n
ámá n àmàbárā n àmàbárángà a. ámábérè n ámábíejù p.n.
ámábinbǒ n ámábípì n ámábò^ n ámábǔrù n
n ámádé v.n.
Àmádí p.n. ámádǒkípákúmá; n nò
ámáfíemá v.n. Àmàfìná p.n. ámáfínì n
ámáfírì n ámáfíyè n ámáfíeyé n ámágúa v
ámáìbàlàfámà n ámáígbíkì n ámájû n ámákámá v ámákírí n
f f
fm f
fm ms
fm fm mi f
brass or bronze cymbals
tongue-sole, Cynoglossus spp. (also álápúínjī, álínjì)
pl. chiefs
tongue-sole, Cynoglossus spp. (also álápónìa, álínjì)
to make someone a chief; to enthrone or install one as a chief, to cause one to be wealthy e.g. servants, slaves, workers, peasants rendering service to their master
family in Okrika, living in Ngeme Biri
pompano, Trachinotus spp. small flat fish of no value
water-lily mostly found in streams and brackish water e.g. those at Elelenwo waterside (Ịkpụrụba market)
family in Okrika, living around Okuru village
aquatic masquerade ascribed to Ogu
reduced in size; declined in stature
family in Ogu
family in Okrika
drum with loud tone also imgbiri
tongue-sole, Cynoglossus spp. (also =álápónìa) print-cloth
human being, usually applied to a developed person, young man or lady
town
right hand
right hand side
national issue
arbitrary end of town, usually applied by both Kọnịju and Tuboniju to describe the respective ends of Okrika
one who founds a new land, a founder
voice of the people; mandate
townsman; native
national cake, food for everybody ámádá;nó
ruler; paramount chief
ceremony of the last night of the year; watch-night, 31st December also amagụa
family in Ogoloma; also a common proper noun in Ikwere
founder of a new land
to cause breach of the peace; riot tumult
family in Okrika living in Ambeme Biri and Kọrọnị-Ọgọnọ
lit. national fire; fire that is for all like electricity, idiomatically applied to denote familiar property for all
national duty or obligation
national cake; common property of the nation
common news; current news or even
to perform the cleansing ceremony of the watch-night, 31st December (amagụa-din)
special name given to lightning without thunder (sowakam)
national fund
home; at home; homeward
to hawk; to go round town; to do marketing
soil of the land, also ascribed to the deity, "mother earth" which is
fm
fm
6
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
ámákórómábǒ n ámámíẹmíẹyè n ámáná n ámánà n àmànà-éréná- n sínwèngì
àmànèmìká n ámángángá-bàrà n Àmànùngò-Bírì p.n. ámányánábǒ n ámányánábǒ- n ámgbárà ámányánábǒ-áwô n ámányánábǒ-chû n ámányánábǒ-ópû n ámányáná-kírì n ámánwéngíbǒ n ámáóbî n ámáóbû n ámáóchóyè n ámáógónò n ámáówú n ámáû n.pl. ámásó n ámátémésó n ámáwárí n
ámáwárí-kórúbò$ n àmbá n Ámbà p.n. Àmbémè Biri p.n. ámbílém$bìlé n
ámb'rà (ámbùrà) n ámb'rè (ámbìrè) n ámbúrá n àmgbà n Àmgbàrà p.n. àmgbàrá n ámgbárímà adv
ámgbō n Àmìẹsímákà p.n.
ámìníkpò p.n. ám';a v ánáná n ánánà n
v ànànà n ánáná-ógbó n
ànàngà adv
SF
English gloss
usually responsible for the chastity of girls or virgins one who establishes a settlement; first settler
custom of the nation; tradition
name of an injiri cloth
hammer
voluntary sexual intercourse between man and woman, married or unmarried; adultery
virgin
tradition; culture of the people
ward or area in Okrika
king
sceptre of the king
princes and princesses, royal children crown
majesty
kingship, kingdom, royalty
prostitute
common sickness, epidemic, influenza
civil war also amaowu
tribute, tax, national contribution
home; at home, where home is also amaju
civil war also amaobu
townsmen, natives, indigenes of a place pl. of mmabò;
?
mother-earth, deified spirit of the land; guardian angel of a people town-hall; place where the people of a village or town usually assemble; hotel
publican; hotelier
young lady, also commonly used as name
family in Okrika; another name for the Kalio family
ward or an area in Okrika
lizard (abb. ámbílé)
sister
brother
waves
cheek, jaw
family in Okrika, living in Agba Biri
walking stick
allusively referring to something or somebody indirectly; to look sideways, looking with a glance
millipede; also, m@gbō
family in Okrika living in Awọlọme Biri; the native name of Chief Ogudire
masquerade of the Ogoni people, comparable to Kiri-Owu of Okrika to wrap something, to wrap; to wrap around the body with cloth sheep
sparkles in the salt water by night
to roast on fire
goggling of eye especially to terrorise someone flock of sheep
as soon as; immediately
fm
fm
fm ms
7
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
SF
English gloss
ànàngàràbà àndàá anda-na-iko-na ángá
ángâ
àngàá
ángálá ángánàngánà ángānyō àngàrà àngàràfí
ángī ángìlóf àngùa àní
ànìàtíbì ànìbàrábù`^ ànìbèjínyè ànìbèníbè àníéréchì
ànígósè ànìgbòrìkírí-kìrì ànìkánìká ànìkánìkàbàràmiì `@ẹ
àniò`$kúmà ànìsìmèòkúsíméók ú
ànísō
ànìtéi-ángá (àn'tẹí-ángá)
ánjí
ánjú
ànwùa ànwùkìrì (ànwùtòrù) ányá ányám$kpékē
ányín
ànyìn ányámâ ànyìmànyímá
Ànyìẹmé Biri àpà
ápáịn
àpàlà
n v.a. n pron v.n
n
n ph.w n
n
v
a.
n
n
n
v conj. ph.w adv adv adv adv adv conj v
ph conj.
adv adv
n n n v n
v
n
n n a. a.
p.n. n
n
n
lines of cracks in a canoe bend; bent
joint
some
live, side
representing twenty in counting e.g. inji-anga (20 rackets of fish) mangrove wood
from all sides i.e. considering all angles
dwelling place; habitation
native garden-egg
to extort, to grab
sour
envelope (<Eng.)
spear, javelin (obs)
that, it
used as the verb of incomplete predication (v.i.p)
because; for the reason that
on account of that; because of that following that
again; also; in addition
immediately thereafter
therefore; an account of that
because of that, therefore
at once; immediately
or; instead
to, compel; to force also mieka-mieka-baramiè
well; then; if so; so; in that; also adv. however it is; in any case; however
even then, yet; still yet especially; more so
edge; line near a dividing portion
brow of the eye
line of weaving on a basket e.g. on the 'ịkata' or net or cloth to yawn
imaginary strange place of suffering and disorderliness
to spread
conjunctivitis; supposed imported infection believed to have been introduced by the stranger labourers who used to mud our houses in the past; it affects the eyes, which get inflamed and produce matter hanging at the canthus of the eyes (<Igbo ìbàtòmgbólù)
cinder, burning coal or fire wood
egg
broken
weak pains at the joints as a result of tiredness arising from fatigue, over exercise, etc. also kèmèkèmé
ward or an area in Ogoloma
voracious eater (bùrù-apa, also bùru-anwua
dry epidermis; skinny scale
axe
8
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS ápálápá n
àpányā n àpìàn n àpìanfí v ápíapía n àpìlìké n
ápíitíi n ápíitíipàa n àpìpìngìlárì n ápún n
n ápúrá n
ápúrá-sárá v.n.
àpùurá v àpùrùmbà n árá v àrà a. árà a. àràbà n àràrá n arègérègé n
árí n
árí dá v.p. árì pron. àrì pron. àrìà a. àrìàpú n.pl. àrímgbà n àrìsó ph.w árìsó ph.w áró excl. árú n árúbò$ n árúdǐa v
árúdókútí n árúdûa v.n. árúdûatì n árúdûkúnò n árúéférè n árúkúlò n
n
árúpíkéchín n árúpíkényó n Àsà p.n.
àsàbà n
SF
f
f f
English gloss
dish made up of tapioca and ripe plantain in oil jelly-fish
oath by riddle
to take oath
bird sp.
marketing system whereby people buy on credit and sell immediately to refund cost or value to owner of product; a system mostly applied in the fish market, gari and other food commodity (<Eng.)
fool, idiot
big fool, a nonentity
snake-like fish of the hagfish family (Ogu dialect)
longish snake-like mudfish in creeks; hagfish
ascaris worm in the human body
rind, skin, bark; sheath
method of fishing with cast-net on tilapia (atabala) fish; rotten rind of cassava is spread on a spot to attract the fish during flowing tide when the catcher spreads his net over them
to embrace with great joy
filthy rag
to roast by heating
those
her
wide mouthed pitcher
fatty, oily substance found floating on food
cloth dazzling in appearance
hook
angle, fish with hook
she
they
their
sorcerers, wizards, people addicted to supernatural powers
all of them
those, those also
even herself; she too or she also
expression of assent, denoting 'that's it' isn't it?
boat, canoe, vehicle
partner in business; a canoe-man; fellow crew
to separate business front; to break off partnership in business, like the biblical references to Paul and Barnabas (Acts 15:36)
regatta
complete, competition, racing
sports; games display
stern of a boat or canoe or ship
dish having the shape of a boat. Boat-like dish, pan or earthenware bow or fore of a boat, canoe, ship
social entertainment spree accorded to friends or members of a family or society (arụkụlọ-ocho)
pole pinned deep at the waterside to which boats are tethered for safety anchorage; space allowed for safety or convenience of boats
people in Imo State living very close to the Rivers State (they live on the other side of the Imo river)
cloth with black and white stripes running down
9
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS àsàmbìa p.n.
àsàrà n
ásé n áséménì n.pl. áséméníbò$ n àsèmìnàlò n ásémínímíníbà n
n ásétí v.n.
ásétíbǒ n àsíkò p.n.
ásúkáịn n ásúmágélégélé n
ásùn n Átábá n àtàbàkà n àtàbàlà n átámgbá n átàmgbàlàmgbàlà n (bà)
àtàràm n àtèí num. àtèlí n
àtígàrà n átúkpánū n átúmpì p.n.
átùmá n átún-óbórì n àwàkìbà n àwò n Àwòlòme Biri n àwòmènì n áwú n àwúf(ú) n áwúwú a. áyá a. áyámà adv. áyámbúrámá a. áyápríprì a. áyásàn n áyásíkì n àyè n áyē excl. áyò n àyō n áyó-ó excl.
SF
ms f
English gloss
masquerade with long wooden legs
sardine like fish, more full of scales than the sardine. It develops to be the herring (afarị)
youth in men
young men
young man; gentleman (Mister-Mr)
reddish cloth introduced first at Ogu
small lizard commonly found in dwelling places
cramp as a result of lack of blood-flow
to display youth; youthful assertion
one who displays youth in any form
rhythmic dance that is accompanied by songs and music produced by drum and cymbals
fish with long bill, like the swordfish but smaller. ? marlin Makaria spp.
assumed mammal in the ocean characterized by unsteady habitation; abusive term usually applied to a wicked vagabond who loafs about horse
people and a town in Andoni (Obolo) district of Bonny LGA mangrove vegetation with broad leaves and whitish stems
tilapia
loud small drum usually played on with tiny long sticks
earthworm, also, foot-rot suspected to have been caused by the fluid from earth-worm
rope made from a particular shrub
ten in counting
road, way through passage; way for solution of a problem (also = ẹmbẹ; achọ
flowing, gown similar to agbada
fool
masquerade of raffia with horns on the head; one of the masquerades that dance to Oboni
tar obtained from the swamp;. [Ogu dialect] (also = ítùmá
prolific female goat
monitor lizard, ‘iguana’
children
word or an area in Okrika
children, when/groups
red colour, also camwood
money attained without being worked for. Also fosa (coined)
reddish
first, ancient
newly
beginning life-stage; very youthful
very early stage of a phenomenon; beginning of an event
early nightfall; dusk
ancient times; earliest period
things
exclamation of lamentation
onion (< Port.)
easy drift in favour of the tide
expression regretting or thinking of a supposed error
f f
f
ms
10
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
Áyóngú-Biri p.n. (Ayungu)
áyónì n.v. Ázùabíe p.n.
ázízà n ázízá n
B
B,b al báà excl. bábā v
bábāsárà v bàdàrá a. bàín v bálá n bálā v bàkàlàmá adv bálálà a. bálìbálì n.ad
v bámmà adv
bámmàfùkú v.adv bánábáná a. bànánà n bàràrá a. bàràbàràmá adv béē v.adv beé excl.
bìanbo n bìanmá v bìanbòapú n bíbílàbí n bílē v
v
bìríjì n bírò n bísòp n bísòp-kìrì n bóō a. bóō v bóbbō v
Bòdò p.n. bódō v
SF
English gloss
ward or an area in Okrika
iron, to press (< Eng.)
village owned by Okrika people, sharing boundary with the Ikwerre of Oginiba
broom (<Igbo)
spice, in grains, mostly used with other spices like onyi, to prepare some concoction for correction of irregular menstruation [borrowed]
consonant, the second letter of the Okrika alphabet
expression of the negation, "no" (borrowed)
to cut or chop a log of wood planlessly, to make a rough and careless cutting
to talk carelessly and irresponsibly; to gossip; to cut into pieces
wide open, spread wide
to bite off with the teeth
fish with faint scales
to be cautious of something; to consider other people; to be considerate spread open
bright, radiant
crucial point; climax or turning point; urgent also ìchìrìmà
all of a sudden
to jump out all of sudden
clear, plain, understandable, strong; real
fruit
wide open expanded like a big sea or estuary
shedding tears profusely
to hurry; to be quick; quickly; to be fast
expression made by an interrogator, in a game of riddle, alerting the person interrogated, to guess the thing the interrogator has in mind a stroke is made on the head of the interrogated to call his attention stranger, visitor
to meet; to collide with; to jam
foreigners
animal sp.
to dye cloth or hair
used idiomatically to mean doing something seriously e.g. eating, drinking, writing, etc.
bridge (<Eng.)
biro, writing material (<Eng.)
bishop (<Eng.)
office and position of a bishop, bishopric
plenty, much, enough
to touch lightly; dub
to pat someone as of rocking a baby; to connive at a child's faults thus letting him go loose
town in BOLGA in Rivers State
to eat untidily
11
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
bókā a. bókètì n bòkù-bòkú a. bólì n bòmá n.v bòmányáná n bòmásísé v bórímā v bùán n bùanbùán a. bùápáká adv bùápákáyé n bùbá n bùdùkùmá adv
búkā v.adv bùlèbùlé a. bùlúkù n bún n búnéé a. bùrùkúbùrùrú a.adv búrāsín v
B, b
B, b al bá v v n bàá n bábā n báchî n
báín a. báínyó n bàká a. bákú v
v bákú-síkír;ì v bàlá1 n bàlá2 n bàlá3 n
bàlàbàlá a. bálábálà a. bálábálà v báláfâ n.f báláfámá a. bálátáịntáịn a. bàlí v
bálílí a.
SF
English gloss
small, not large in quantity or size bucket (<Eng.)
not tight, loose
bowl; football (<Eng.)
praise
having respect and dignity
to awake
to allow for a gradual increase
masculine of fua; father-in-law to a husband
large and wide, as of meshes of net
happening all of a sudden unexpectedly
accident, sudden happening
casual loose wear with open sides (<Yor.)
falling into water or some mishap altogether, knowingly or unknowingly
to sell by auction; selling at considerably low price bungling, not orderly and neat
frock for ladies wear, blouse
bee
serene, clear, fair, smooth
growing luxuriantly, plenty in rising quantity
to uproot
a consonant, the third letter of the Okrika alphabet to kill or destroy
to crack or break \n 3
tomorrow; also as name abbreviated
daughter; luck
bye (<Kịrịkẹ) collq.
strength, power
blocked with phlegm in the throat (pùkò-báịn)
cold in the head as when the nostril is filled with phlegm; also bányó plenty, many, much
to strike with hand or something, to crack
to reprint or weave akuete cloth from another cloth, copying
to wash a piece of cloth without soap especially after soaking
stick
fishing trap set in the river or sea
minute and hour hands of the clock [coined]
fair in complexion
confused, worried
to struggle, to contend with a task
fear
fearful, frightening
having fear with fickleness
to add in order to effect a change in taste or fashion or speech; to embellish
word usually applied to describe a disfigured eye, as when eyelids appear raised and steadily open
12
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS bámá v
bàngùngú n bányó n n n bàpá n bàpàsàní n
bápúkō n bápúró a.v bárā n bàrà n
SF
English gloss
to impose some responsibilities on someone; shifting duty to someone forcefully or by appeal
wax in the ear
lit. a place of killing
cold in the head
treacherous planning
calabash, keg
skin infection common with children where the craw-craw like swellings contain yellowish fluid
chin, the lower extremity of the face, below the mouth stammering
hand
method, style, size
electric fish or eel
succour, help, bet
to shake-hands with someone
method of fishing for mudskippers, mostly undertaken by women, who rush the mudskippers into holes on the swamp from which they pull them out
to have a dealing with someone; to be connected with someone somehow, privately or secretly
to clap hands
handwork
to be good at making presents to people; to be free-handed, liberal groundnut
completely hale and strong, economically and physically (generally used in describing age of man: barajịjị-bùọjịjị)
arm
remnant; last proceeds of any stock; what remains from the lot
palm of hand
anyhow; in a careless manner; as it pleases one
anyhow; in a careless manner; as it pleases one
anyhow; uncontrollably; as it pleases one; irresponsible behaviour provenly, testifying or observing something by oneself
pilfering; stealing in a secret way; pinching
honesty; also furuka
to confirm; to sign or make thumb impression on paper
to forgive; to remove ones hands from; to disconnect; to forsake; yield remission of sin
succeed, overcome; successful
to pre-occupy with; to engage oneself with something, whiling away time
to point at a place or someone by way of showing or explaining or estimating
fingers
finger nails
repeat, again
surnamed
not mensing again; stopped mensing to multiply
bárábā báráchūa bárádā bárádé
báráémbémá
báráfārī báráfīrī báráfūkūmā báráimbí bárájíjí
bárákōngō bárákónmáyé bárákúbǔ bárálābārālàbàrà bárálāōkūlàòkù báráláyéláyé báránà
báráóbírí báráóbíríká bárápúnú bárásīn bárásīnpírímìẹìrì mà
bárásò bárásōsōmā
bárátók úmá
bárátúngbálì bárátúngbálí- ìnìmè
bárí báríchị^n báríkíríóríká bárímà
nf v.n
v
n
v
v
n
v
n adv
n
n
n adv adv adv adv a.
n
v
v n.p.
v. a. v. a.
v
n n
v v.a. a. v
13
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
barínyóríká a. bárínyóríkábò$ n báríyíkà a. báríyíkàbò$ n bàrò n básō n báwérímá a.
báwírìá ph.w bē pron béè pron
bèé v bèbèé a. béì id.
béin a. béín n béịn-ákpá n béinmà v.adv bèkèré n bèkénì n bèkèníbò$ n bèkèníkù n bèkènínguò`$ n bèkètúbò n
bélé a. bèlèé a. bélé n
n béléchúkùpèlèkà a.
bélégī v v bèlègí v
bèlèmá v.n bélékí n bèlèbípì n bèlèpúkò n bélíbélí n bémé n bènébéné id. bere n.a. béré n béréágío v.a. béréàkònì n bérébē a. bérébǒ n bérébárásì n bérébía v
SF
English gloss
not seeing again, blind
a blind person also tórúmgbólúpúnbò#
barren, not bringing forth child any more
person not producing again; a menopause
daughter belonging to him or her someone
very early day-break; twilight
left over as remnant and kept away against the future or another day e.g. food saved against another day like rice, soup, etc.
bye bye; we meet again, see you
referring to this or that man; he
demonstrative pronoun used despicably, referring to someone (usually goes with the suffix "sọ" thus, bée só (even this)
to say
filled as of corpulent stomach
expression denoting a flat fall of body, thus bèimá kóró, falling flat prostrated
full; complete
honey
honeycomb
to fill; fully
spear
white people
white man
cocoyam
pineapple
weekday; also chóchì that is, chóchì téréadín éné, ending with éné (day)
wide open
sweet
pot
tongue
having speech-defect in the language, consisting of bad pronunciation, taking j for z, t for th, s for z or sh etc. talking with a lisp
to wag the tail around its master as does dog
to flirt like a girl
to have a disturbance as of a disorderly stomach pain, possibly ending in frequent defecating
love, blessing
fat, lard, grease
flattering; honey-coated tongue
sweet tune, melody
suffering; having no stand; frustration
fish of mullet group
for ever and ever; everyday also bèsìkí-bésíkí
prediction; fortunate
case; palaver; story
to argue; fond of arguing or dragging issues; argumentative [coined] panel of judges; those who sit over a case to decide the findings so-called
doctor, soothsayer; foreteller
guilt, failure in a suit; damnation
to counsel
f
14
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ
béréchúọgbọ^ béréfámá bérékárákárà bérékón bérékónbáràsìmà bèrènĩ
bèrènĩ bèrènìbóyé bèrènìkúrámà bèrènìpákúmà bèrènìpírì bèrènìpíríyè bèrènìyé
béréótómáókúẹín bérépélébípí bèrèré
bérésé- tíbígbánábǒ bérésí bérésí-béréní bérésúa bérététémá bérétóanpú bérétón bérétónbǒ bérétónpírì bérétónpíríkùrò bèrí
bèrìá bèrìgbèlèmá bèrìgbèlèmà-pókí bèrìsàká
bèsìkíbésík í bèyèpúkò bìí
bìá
bìá bìábìá bìàjáníní bìamá pbìapáká bìayèmá bìbò$ bìdé
bíé
bíe
bíéákū=kúbíeákú bíebā
PoS
v v v n v v v n n v v n n n n n n a. n
n
v
v v.a. n. pl. v
n
n
n
n
a.
v ph.w n
adv n
v
v
a. a. a. v v n n v v n
n a.
SF
English gloss
conspire
to argue, to drag issues
to make peace; to reconcile; compromise
truth, right
to judge cases
to condemn; to pronounce adverse judgement on
to allow, to agree
faith
destiny also góbóyé
accord; agreed
to admit; to confess
permissiveness; sexual and moral tolerance also búlókómáírì solemn promise, a pledge
vow, something promised; oath
belief
allegory
judgement, verdict
bent, slanting
accused person
guilt
to admit; to yield; to accept
complain, to state guilt; a grievance
to advise; to offer an opinion to; advisory
rulers
to rule; to give order
ruler
governance
government, governing power
ear
bent, not straight, slanting, shifting to a side
to open the ears carefully for listening
to listen attentively
hair on the tragus of the ear known as the trages: also ìgèdí (<Nembe) (it determines age)
always; for ever and ever: also bènébéné
vowels of the Okrika alphabet
to ask for; demand
to consult; to plan
bright, ripe, cooked, healed
white, whitish
shining brightly
to flash, to brighten
to shine forth; to radiate as of light
supplications; petitions; things asked for by prayer
demander or one who requests or asks
to ask for much for use, and lay aside as surplus
to discharge faces
inside of anything; room, hole, etc; also used as prefix to words to denote the inner part or feeling of the human body e.g. biebù, biebara compunction deep and painful regret for wrong doing
creating a feeling of excess in satisfaction and as a result causing
15
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ
bíebárá bíebárámá
bíebèlé bíebíebìe
PoS SF
a. v
v.n
a.
v
v
v
a.
v nf
English gloss
nausea
forgetful
to forget; to have no more thought of something again; to leave thinking about something
to be happy; joy, happiness, jubilation
full of rooms
bearing something inwardly; to bear in mind
to be angry
to assert, to develop to puberty
producing nausea or sickening feeling; nauseous
to moan
smaller form of òròm(ú) (grouper) (also = órúnjí
to charm the mind of someone with love philtredly
to change one's mind; a change of mind
to groan
to clear the voice by making some sound with the mouth shut, to indicate the presence of human being by making a voice sound with the mouth
to endure; to resist pain
innermost, far inside
forefathers; ancestors
parlour, drawing-room
to think or remember
reliable servant; one who is always at the beck and call of a master
to dare
to endure; try to resist
having ready feeling to help the needy; freeminded to render help latrine; a place for passing stool or discharging faeces
to cough out phlegm in a rude way, forcing it out with some disturbing and disgusting groaning noise
annoyed; vexed; odious, disgusting
to cause some obnoxious feeling; nauseating
wishes, will
latrine; waste closet; latrine house
to groan like a sick person
to give heed or attend to what is said; to hearken
to fall; to fail in life or venture; yield
to yield; to disdain; surrender
to fall or fail flat
elephant
to run frequent stool as a result of stomach disorder
town in DELGA of Rivers State
to dive in
to capsize with canoe or boat
method of fishing with net, usually carried out by night
ancient masquerade fond of sleeping. It characterizes the sleeping nature of the night job. Owned and played by Ngeme Biri people
ward or area in Okrika
land alienated to someone; place in demand
mouth
to revoke or recall a statement or pronounsement; to recall a curse earlier declared
bíebù#
bíechúa
bíechúkúrúmá
bíedé
bíedù`$ba
bíedīn v bíedínmá v.n bíefíe v bíegúnúgúnú v
bíeíkírímá v bíejù n bíejú-àdàpù n bíekírí n bíekórómá v bíekórúbǒ n bíekpómá v bíekụrọma v bíelókólókó a. bíẹ nyó n bíeókó v
bíesì a. bíesímá v.a. bíetónyé n bíẹwárí n bíefíe v bífíe v bíkí v bíkídè`$rìpìrí v bíkíkóró v bìlà n bílá v Bílé p.n. bìlē v
v bìlèmè n bìlèmèsìtònkà n
Bìlèmé Bìrì n bìnyó n bípí n bípíbárí v
ms
16
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
bípíbélè n bípíbèlē a. bípíbélémá v bípíbí v
bípíbíru n
bípíbǒkò n bípíbò$kùbò$kú a. bípíbǒrómá v
bípíbǔu n bípíbûnàyé n bípíbûóí v
bípíchú v bípíchúa v bíp íchúapírì v bípídá v bípífàá a.
bípífé v
bípífíì a. bípífóàn v bípífóróró a.
bípīgáịngáịn a. bípígbéìn v bípígbéinyé n bípígbúsú a. bípíkú a. bípíkón v bípípénkpén a. bípíl ámá v bípímèpú a. bípíní n bípínyáná a. bípíófírí a. bípíófóríbǒdàfíká n bípíògbòsò a. bípíògbòsónyànàá v.a. bípíògbòsókà a. bípíókí v bípíókíà v bípíókólò n bípíóyī a. bípíóyímá a.
SF
English gloss
tongue
convincing tongue; talkativeness with flattery
to converse; chat
to remind someone of a former prediction made against him or her in a querying tune
first drink an intending husband ever offers to request the hands of a fiancee to her parents; it is also known as bǒkógbóló-írú i.e. drink for knocking at the door
lips of the mouth together esp. when shut
reluctant; slow of speech; hesitant to say or speak
to allow someone to talk, check someone from retorting; to make passive insult to an unconcerned person
catfish with longish head, and not as tasteful as the real catfish
report esp from news or gossips
to talk with reserve; to hide or conceal by not talking out or saying what one sees or knows about something
to concern oneself with; to involve in
to make a vow; to consult for persuasion; to brief one for consideration to pronounce curse against someone's progress or plans or pursuit
to receive abuses and curses; to defend oral attacks and reproaches speechless; not capable of making statement; nearly full as of a container lit. loss of mouth
to cause someone to eat or taste something outside her home for the first time (generally an applied custom of lovers or newly joined pair where the man is made to "buy her mouth"
intentionally being unable to say something one knows of something; tongue-tied being naturally dumb
to argue; to be mindful of pettiness; to bother oneself of trivial things when orally spoken
incapable of saying something as a result of embarrassment, looking agape, lacking speech
orally vibrant, talking with emphasis; good at speech also bípíófírì
to shut one's mouth
cover, lid
protruding mouth with thick lips
tongue-tied as a result of shyness
to be boastful
flippant of tongue; fond of rteporting what one sees also bípísárásárá to taste, to sip
high-lipped mouth
boasters; proud speakers
fond of high talks, exaggerators
rhetorical; good at speech
fish of the "okola" group having a long bill with a longer lower jaw agreeing, living together co-operatively
compromise
disagreeing; unco-operative, being in disagreement
to reply, to respond to
to discuss and plan with others; to take decision after discussing
tip, apex, peak, spout of a kettle
painful at the mouth (abusive)
pungent; sharply affecting the organs of taste, as if biting or irritating;
f
f
17
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ
nf bípípékéré v
PoS SF
English gloss
acrid
guitarfish spp., Rhinobatos spp.
to reply; to retort; to answer
either of the two lips esp. when open
to obey; to do what one is told; obedience
to say something one ought not to say; to say something mistakenly; slip of tongue
to make reference to someone unconcerned in an affair disrespectfully flippant of tongue
to talk to oneself; to soliloquize
to disregard oral attacks; unmindful of abuses
to come together in order to plan agreeably; to discuss together
to taste before any other; not to interrupt
to while away time with casual conversation or eating of snacks or fruits, before the real talk or eating takes place
hesitant
snacks, toast
careless, wild, irresponsible talk; anything not worthy of serious notice to make mouth at; to make disdainful reference
oral play, use of words in pretentious language
person worthy of honour whose word is valued
wards or quarters in Okrika
age group also polo
to dress (yé bírì = to dress up)
to bathe in water (mèngì bìrí)
dresses; fashion wear; clothing for fashion
to dress someone; to endue or invest
loin of the body; girth of the body
to guard one's loin
bishop, head of the church; a consecrated clergyman for the spiritual direction of a diocese
bishopric
cloth
fathom of cloth
small monstrous fish like òfò, not generally eaten by indigenes
one and a half fathoms of cloth; also, erekonju rag; piece of useless cloth
piece of cloth usually six or eight yards something asked for will
come
animate something of note representing higher animal like man; also used to suffix words to denote "somebody" and verb nouns, e.g. "fébǒ" (buyer), "dèrìbò$" (seller)
incomer; a stranger
every, each, every person; all and sundry
lest
eel-like fish with silver skin; cutlass fish; silver fish to hide
to hide away; hidden off
hiding-place; covert
bípípéíká
bípípékérè n bípípókí v.n bípírímá v
bípísábámá v bípísārāsārā a. bípísébûfíemá v bípíséléká v.a. bípíséògbòchúà v bípísín v bípísósómá v
bípísòsoò`@ a. bípísósómáyé n bípísòyésóyé n bípísúmá v bípítí n bípíyélábǒ n bírí(bìrì) n
n bírì v bìrìí v bíríáyē n bírímā v bìrìmàbírì n bíríkún v bísòp n
bísòpkìrì n bìtè n bìtè-ìkìbìbâ a. bìtèkpònbìéréwárí n mún$
bìtè-kònjú n bìt è-pèkérè n bìtèwàrí n bìyé n bô v bǒ n
bǒbǒ n n.pro
n bófà adv
bǒgó n bò$í (bùò`$í) v bòífà v.a. bò$ìnyọ^ n
f
18
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
bò$í-òríyè n bójú n bójù (béjù) part.
bǒkó n bò$kòrò-bǒkóró a.
SF
English gloss
vision
original home; place of birth
used as a stress when attributing to someone, (írí-bójù) "you for that matter" or "you yourself"
door
clumsy, lazy
large sea-fish like the manatee; dolphin; porpoise
town in Okrika
to loan money; borrow; to lend something to somebody
far, distant; difficult
fishing-port situated between Opuada-kiri and Tombi-kubù in Bonny River
afar
to lie down
to build exhaustively; to make a large building surprising people's imagination -also wólólō
to delay someone
not very dry; dry outwardly but with congealed inner flesh, as of cured fish or meat
to eat veraciously
mildew
fishing-port
area in Port Harcourt, so named
whether, if
to pass by
to save; to help; to open door ajar; to promote
passage; a road, way
to drink; drink
lacking salt
self
used as prefix to words in order to indicate or describe things, feelings, temperament of the body e.g. bǔdèín (to feel all right)
mangrove forest
to be mindful of oneself
body-pain; having a feeling of laziness to do something promptly; retuctant to exert energy on something
capable of creating or causing pain
to wrap oneself
to be serious and devoted to duty
confused state of the body; disturbed body
confounded
hesitant; doubting, undecided; inactive
self-checking; judging oneself
to pretend or presume well in order to face some eventuality -also
bûl érí (Ogoloma dialect)
fond of seeking one's personal interest in affairs, self-centred
one's inner self
to hide oneself in order to create chance for a purpose also òbù`$gbì'n take advantage of familiarity
to boast oneself
saving oneself
amazed, amazing
bòlìá Bòló
bǒlō bò$loò`@ Bólōbā
bò$lòjú bò$lòló bólólō
bò$lòmàá bòọ`$bòọ`@
bópī bòpòròbà bòrìkìrì
b ó r ó bǒrọ^ bǒrómā bǒrónyó bû
bǔ b`ú
bùù bûábàlá bǔakū
bûákúmá bûamú
bûb`á bûb`álábálá bûb`álábaláma bûbèrènìkà bûbì bûb`íchìèmà
bûbídò$kí bûb`íe b``ûbílémá bûbín bûbómá bûbǒrómá bûbúamá
nf p.n.
v
a.
p.n.
a. v v
v a.
v
n p.n. p.n. conj v
v
n
v
a.
n
a.
n v a.n
a. v v n a. a. a.n v
a. n
v v.a. v v.a. a.
19
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
bûbúamáfírì n bǔbǔayé n bǔbǔbù a. bǔbǔrò v
b`ùchìè n
bûchíẹmà v bûchíẹtáríká a. bûchú v bûchúayè n bûdáchíẹmà v bûdádíkì v bûdárímá v bûdèín a. bûdéinmá a. bûdékíchíẹmà v bûdèkìkà a.
bûdérímá v.a. bûdíepákúmà v.a.
bû díkídíkí v bûdíkídíkíyé n
bûdín v v bûdǒkí v bûdûa v
bûdûayé n bûdǔkópákúmà v bûdǔkósín v bûdù`$kùká a.
bûébérá v bûélékímá v bûfiì`@ a. bûfí a. bûfúkā n bûfúkābálákà n.a. bûfúkámáyé n
bû fúkāpírì v.a. bûfúrū a. bûgèrègèrè a. bûgèrèré a.n bûgérérémá a. bûgiè`@ excl.
bûgùẹgùé a.
SF
English gloss
miracle
drinkables; things for drinking or smoking
unpalatable; lacking salt in taste; insipid to taste
to be busy occupying oneself in looking for something here and there; struggling for relief
method of fishing where the catcher silently stays on the mangrove branch to spear the incoming fish being lured by the bait already spread at the spot before the flowing tide
to erect oneself
restless, hasty and unsteady, anxious
to be involved; to concern oneself in
clothing for the body, cloak
to support oneself
to test oneself
to give way, to quit, to avoid, to depart
to feel all right
feeling comfortable and satisfied
to exalt oneself to be proud
feeling out of sort; not quite active to do anything also bûnwànàn wànàká
to submit oneself; respect and humble oneself
to be officious, to be concerned with issues of a community; to show oneself
to take care of oneself; self-guide
something used to take care of oneself; a self-guide, e.g. a religious observation or policy like prayer, religious cap etc; also charm, talisman, ring as self-guide
to change oneself as for changing dress
also applied to insects and reptiles as metamorphosing
to massage the body
to defend oneself; to protect oneself; to save oneself from danger or trouble
something used to protect oneself like medicine or charm
to confess and say out one's faults and wrong doing; to admit openly to excuse oneself from faults, charge, blame etc.
feeling undecided or hesitant, being precautious of oneself, not responsive to act also bûbèrènìkà
to sympathise with someone who is bereaved or in pains of agony
to test oneself after being well from illness
benumbed, impotent
used to oneself; body being fashioned to a particular behaviour
pains of the body; trouble; torment
risk-taking; daring
problems
to persecute; to punish or torment; troublesome
odorous body
shivering and quivering, being afraid or nervous, trembling
being ashamed; shame; disgrace
disgraceful; miserable; wretchedly; bad
expression used to mean "beg your pardon", "excuse me", "hold on" etc. as when someone makes a slip of tongue
feeling bashful and inactive; shy
20
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
bûgúọ a. bûgbálí v bûgbéín a. bûgbéịnb`árá a. bûgbéịnb`íté n bûgbínmá v
bûgbōn a. bûgbìrìpú n
bûgbírípúmá a. bûhéhē a. bûíb`í n.a. bûìkìrìí a. bûjìá a. bûjíkè v bûjìnìajínía a. bûjùkùjùkú a. bûkáịnb`ō v bûkán v bûkáná a. bûkánákà1 a. bûkánákà2 a. bûkán-óbí n bûkárákà1 a. bûkárákà2 a. bûkárákárámá v bûkéké v bûkékú a. bûkèmèkèmé a. bù`$kò n bûkób`írí v bǔkómà v bûkòrìkòrí a.
bûkórómá adv bûkpá v bûkpìrìpú a.n
bûkpòkpòó a. bûkpómá v.a.
b`ùkú n bù`$kụ n bûkúa v bù`$kùbù`$kùmá adv
v bûkúlò v bûkúrò n
bûkùròká a. bûkúrómà v bù`$kùrú n
SF
English gloss
curative; self-curing
to be careful and get prepared in order to avoid danger; to be defensive befitting, worthy of; convenient
worthy, merited
cover cloth
to place oneself in some circumstance; to consider; to attribute what is said or announced to oneself
lonely
tingling sensation of the body as a result of surprise of tickle effected by an external force or agency
surprising, marvellous
panting as a result of exhaustion; feeling light
thinking more of oneself; self-centeredness; selfishness
thick-skinned to reproach or rebuff; insensitive
swaggering as a result of being drunk
to be active in working; be agile and alert
doubting, not decided; fickle-minded
being disturbed by insensitive perspiration
to realise oneself in error or misdemeanour
to rape; to force sexual intercourse on someone
that is enough for the body; suitable for the body
not adequate for the body e.g. undersize garment
pomade to smear the body with
leprosy
not enough for the body
someone who lacks
to get oneself prepared; to be ready
to discipline oneself
being checked by horror and therefore cautious to act
physically weak
monkey
to prepare oneself in readiness for any eventuality
to drink and leave some remnant
getting weakened as a result of much exertion or tiredness (<Kal.) also bûkèmèkèmé
really, completely satisfactorily, fully occupying also júkúmà
to take good care of oneself medically, neatly etc.
tingling sensation of the body arising from some spontaneous urge; some exhibition of surprise caused by inward feeling of impulse exhausted as of body
body-strengthening, rejuvenating as of efficacious medicine or nourishing tablets
vagina also érébû
hole in the ground
to avoid something by retracting oneself; to shrink back
appearing sluggish and dull
struggling to attempt or try what one is ignorant of
to board a canoe or ship or any vehicle
economic hardship affecting someone
not physically fit; being unwell, infirm
to try; to endeavour physically, mentally and economically
a fishing net hemmed with cane, mostly used by women
21
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
bûkùrùá a. bûlàkàyé n bûlàkàyémíẹ v bûlérí v
mbù`$lò n bù`$lóímbú n bûlókō a.n bûlòkòlókó a.n bûlókómá v bûlókómápírì n Bùlòmè-Bìrì n bù`$lòpèrìpèrì n bù`$lòsèíb`ó v bûmó=bûnmó n bûnádeínkóró v.a. bûnáìnyìá a. bûnákùràá a. b`ùnàmbúlò n
bû némí a.
bûnèmì a. bûnèmìkà adv bǔnō n
bûnùngùnúngú a. bûnwànànwàná a. bûnwéngí a. bûnwónwó a. bûnjìnjí n bûnjínjímá a.
bûnyáná a. bûó n bûọb`árí v.n.
bûóbí v bûóbírímá v.a. bûóbûlò n bûób ûó n bûóchièmá v bûọchúa v.n. bûóchúapú n bûọchúkù n bûóchúkújù n bûoělékímá v
bûoělékímà n bûọfúrò n
SF
English gloss
adjustable and adaptable with people
something that is above one's status
to assert doing what is above one's status
to bluff; misleading someone by presenting a bold front i.e. lólō (Ogoloma dialect)
stomach
navel, the umbilicus
tired, tiredness
prosperous, prosperity
to admit of physical submission
permissiveness
ward or area in Okrika
weaver-bird, yellow bird
to prostrate
sand-bank
to feel satisfied; to be all right
habitual to oneself; someone being used to a way of life or action convenient; agreeable to the needs of oneself; suitable
large bird like the óbóló found in the mangrove forest (it is supposed to be the largest mangrove bird hence the name literally meaning mangrove cow)
keeping oneself respectable and honoured, by good behaviour and appearance
aware of situation of things and to be cautious to know oneself unknowingly, happening unawares
wet dust, dampness shown on glasses; misty appearance especially on furniture
feeling uneasy, worried
brisk and smart; agile
pervading the body; chronic as of old sickness in oneself
fond of being annoyed; looking unhappy; frowning generally
filth, disgust
horrible, disgusting, rejectable, warding off, obnoxious, objectionable, offensive
deep-rooted in the body
foot, leg
to repeat performance of entertainment or act; rehearsal during preparation for any ceremony e.g. masquerade display, dancing clubs, cultural shows, concerts, dramas, operas, comedies etc.
to take care of oneself
alert to activity making oneself suited to action
the fleshy part of the back of the human leg below the knee; calf, tibia generation
to stand firm and own responsibility
to undermine; guile, treachery
adversaries
lower part of the leg; ankle
lower part of any object or furniture e.g. bed, table, chair etc.
to test the results of practice against a show under preparation e.g. drama, masquerading etc. to rehearse
footprint
that part of the leg between the hip and the knee; thigh
22
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
bûọgbáná v bûọgbánáyé n bûọgbarí v bûọíkpálíkpà n
bûọíkpúkù n bûọímgbésé v
bûọísún v bûọjíjí a. bûókórò a. bûóló n bûólóká a. bûósí n bûósí v bûosọ a. bûọtéịn v bûotómà v bûọtòmbùlò v bûtóngù n bûtúngbálì n bûọtúngbálínìmè n bûówú v.n bûóyī n bûọyímá a. bûpálíkà adv bûpálímá a. bûpélé v bûpikímá v.n bûpúnù v bûpúnúmá a. bù`$rụ`@ a. bùrú n bùrùtìbí n bùrùbá n bùrùdùkó v.n
bùrùgbóbàlá n bù rùkèín v bùrùkùnmàá n bǔrúmó n bǔrúmó n bǔrúmó-díkí v
bùrùmm$ó v.n
bùrù-òbí n bùrùpùkó n bùrùpuò`$tàrí n.v bûsébûchín a.n
SF
English gloss
to place one's legs across (a sign of showing off)
foot-rest, footstool
to miss one's steps; to stumble also bûọtò mbùló
the lower part of the leg between the foot and the knee; lower part of the tibia; the ankle in man; the hoof in animal
knee
to cross legs; to forestall someone by disturbing or impeding his plans, progress
to have a stroll; literally, to stretch the leg
firmly and strongly
feel satisfied with a reason; understand
self control; discipline; temperance; abstinence
craving, eager, desire; indiscipline
self respect
to move; get going; leaving a place to start with
being annoyed; painful
lit. to kick with the foot; to treat with disdain
presume; to compare oneself with another
to stumble; to miss one's steps
heel of the foot
toes of the foot
nails of the toes of the foot
to bemoan or recount ones sufferings or experience; self-pity
affliction; anguish; bodily pain
painful to the human body
perhaps, probably
being of necessity; compulsory; inevitable
to circumcise
to free oneself by taking oath when accused; self denial
to endure with great carefulness; to be very careful under pain repressive; keeping desires under control
rotten
yam
yam seedling
famine; starvation
going for food; errand (usually an engagement common with fishermen while at fishing-port when food is finished, the steerer goes home to collect food
carved stick used in picking yam balls or akara balls in a pot
to make a first harvesting of yam, that is, harvesting the first seedling fasting under religious obligation
indigo ink from its fruit
cuttlefish, Sepia spp.
to admire some physical performance or production or exhibition by making presents with money and in kind; to spray money in admiration; to present money to the girls undertaking the "iria" ceremony in their booths
voluntary fasting at home on personal or economic reasons
dropsy
taste or desire for food; desire to work hard for food; hunger
being hungry for food; hunger
self-conceitedness; self-centred
f
23
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
bûséchú v bûséfàpìrí n bûséfìpìkìmá v bûsékímá a. bûs'kiírípírí a.v bûséó-ómà v bûsétí a.v bûsétíká a.v
bûséyéchín a.v bûsíkímá v bûsímá\ v bûsín v bǔsín v bûsínínímá a.v bûsún n bûtímá v bûtímákà adv bûtèkètèké a.
bûtọ^n v bûtórúb`ámá n bûtū a. bǔtū a. b`ùtùbǔtú a. bûwórí a.
bûwòroò`@ a. bûyá a.
CH, ch
Ch, ch
chá excl. chákácháká n chákárápù v
chákpòm adv chámā adv.a
. part.
chárátātāmâ adv ché excl.
chèbù`^ pron chèchèétùò=chèch ph.w ètùbò
chéì excl.
SF
English gloss
to involve oneself; to be concerned in
risk-taking
to take risks; to dare; to undertake a venture willy nilly
eager; creating anxiety
presumptuous, arrogant, proud; to pride in
to presume oneself to rank; to take for granted
to be careless with oneself; to belittle oneself
fond of making oneself grand and puffed-up; careful about the appearance of oneself in the public
self-regard; to honour responsibility or duty; self-respect
to dissociate from a group; to stay aloof also bûsín
to dishonour oneself by disdainful behaviour
dissociate oneself; to refrain, looking unconcerned
to finish a drink by emptying the content
deprived of sensation, cramp affected body; shocking
stretching of the body in exercising
to enjoy oneself
peradventure, probably (Bolo and Ogu dialect) also bûpálíkà, òbìasín anxious to do something by way of service; intending to offer free service
to keep aloof
drunkenness
almost rotten or sour
ignorant, stupid
very soft as being over-ripe also pòtòmpótóm
self-abuse as when one puts on an unfitting wear or admits of personal fault or weakness
emaciating; reducing in size and appearance
habitual, being accustomed to
consonant, the 4th letter of the Okrika alphabet
derisive expression denoting query reproach
negligible remnant of liquid or grain
to escape suddenly; to put into the mouth all at once chakarapuma adv.
swallowing up something automatically
in a continued process, continuously, repeatedly also chàmà
introductory word commonly used interrogatively to emphasise a constant act or practice, what sort? what type? what kind? e.g. chàmà gbórí bèrè? chàmà tómbò$?
escaping very smartly
expression indicating surprise at wrongdoing e.g. telling lies, accident etc.
in what instance? in what respect? usually interrogative; what?
if it had been; were it not that; but for that, in other matters etc also mgbọkụ
exclamation showing pity usually accompanied with kọkọ to show sympathy expressed
24
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
chèsìkí int. chètìbí adv chèyè' int. Chèyèéábǔosò pron. chèyègósè=chégós int.
è
chían a. chíanmā v chíẹ v chíẹchíẹbà n
chíẹchíẹchìẹ a. chíẹkírí n chíẹkórū v chíẹmâ v chìẹmàchíẹmá a.
chíẹmágbín v chíẹsímè v chíkíchíkí a. chíkíchíkíb.a n chìkìrìchíkírí a. chín n chìn-àrú=chìànrú n
chì'n v chíná v
chìnbìpí n chìngiì`@ n chíngbólù n chínpékérè n chìnpíkī v chínpúmbúrò n chìnsàpú n chírā v
chìrá v chírāpū v
chìrì n
chírì n chíríbànàmàá n chírómā v
chìsá v chìtà p.n. choò`^ int. chóchì n
SF
English gloss
when? what time?
because; why?; on which account what?
native name of Chief Okujagu why? for what reason?
suffocate; disturbing the breathing of air
to cause to suffocate
to stand
an allusion usually made to an erander who keeps on moping in absorbed attention; as a result of her mood, she is tossed about from place to place fro joke, looking for the standing daughter chièchièba being in a hurry; anxious, quick desire; standing all along
position, status, standing
to stand and wait to attend a master by standing by
to put erect
descriptive of people standing here and there in anxiety, as a result of some happening like death, accident, fight, commotion and intrusive mood of people
to cast down
to stand steadily
miserly, takes time to release anything in hand
large lump of food (usually applied to fufu; heap of food)
plump with fat calves and fleshy waist
stick
messengers sent to call family people not at home when there is some happening e.g. death or case (lit. call boat)
to call someone, to think
to chain up; to link together e.g. putting beads together on a line of thread or rope or fish on a stick
call or invitation made by someone on another
elevated land; hillock
fruit
piece of stick; beam (biblical)
to restore; call back; reinstate; to recall what was said; to withdraw small pieces of stick; fragments of stick
the sanctified; the called people of God
to lock horns e.g. two rams battling their heads; to buy something on credit; a tick
toputonahatonthehead
to penetrate through a natural division (clouds, rocks etc.); thrust through a mob
open field or square generally used for assembling; also chìrì-ògbó; market place (Ogoloma dialect)
leopard, tiger
lion, also odum (<Igbo)
to join by knitting together or sewing together; also joining of wood e.g. canoe, boat, shutters
to sneeze
market in Eleme in OTELGA, also Ichita
where? in what way? a despicable aspersion cast on someone
church, house for public Christian worship (<English) also used to
25
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
Chóchí-ènè p.n. chóm-chòm-chóm a.
chókò n chòp-chóp n
chú n chû v v chúá n chúá v chùà v
chúachìè n.v
chúagbín v chúajíkā v chúan n chúapíkī v chúasîn v chúayé n chúkán v chúkō v
v chúkú n n n
chúkúchúa v chúkúchúayé n chúkúfórù n Chúkúní Bírì p.n. chúkúrúmā v
chúumú v chúná n ch'puǒ n chuò`$ v chuò`$fûn n
chùọgbó v.n chùràchùrá a.
chùràmàá v chúrú n
a.
SF
English gloss
name the week days, thus, Chọchị-gbọrị-dìnie "Monday", Chọchị- mama-din "Tuesday", Chóchì-tẹrẹadin "Wednesday", Chọchị-sonio- adin or Kalaoruene "Saturday" (<Eng.)
Sunday (also Oruene obs.)
moving about from one corner to another; descriptive of the unsteady movement of a vagabond
fish-drying oven built with locally trodden mud
soursop, succulent fruit with white pulp and black seeds; also (< local Eng. sop-sop)
hat; headgear
to put in
to sing
weir, water-fence for fishing trap in the sea to put s.t. into s.t. else
to put on clothing
method of fishing with spear by the weir (chụa) at the open sea; the catcher stays on the canoe watching the big fishes fanning at the entrance of the inner fence; from the canoe he spears them; to fish by this style
to overthrow
to instigate someone seriously to action
big fish that develops from the mullet, gbúlú family
to divert; to cause to change plan or opinion
to push off; to remove from a course or rank; overthrow also chúagbín extra share or measure; a bonus, gift, or sum added to price or wages to pierce through destructively
to fill with fibre or any soft material in order to prevent leakage e.g. perforations and cracks in canoe being patched
to plug tightly
under-part, bottom or lower section of anything; under
source or starting point of anything
as of old, attribute of the long juju of Arochukwu, also known as Chúkwúàbìamà
to start; to lay foundation; initiate
foundation
south wind
ward or area in Ogoloma
to swallow in toto with some sense of commitment; to push; to instigate
to penetrate in
long pole for pulling in water
island
to cook
liquid salt made from the íkáìn (ashes of mangrove wood); cooked salt (generally used in cooking special meals such as Ọ$dù soup and tòmìnìkú)
to argue, to be disputatious; argumentative
in a state of deadened sensitivity; swaggering and idiotic; mentally feeble
to congest; surge, heap up
nail
filled to a heap; up surge; over-loaded; heaped up
f
26
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
D, d
D, d
dà a. dàá v dàá n
SF
English gloss
consonant, the fifth letter of the Okrika alphabet
some
to receive with receptacle; to take; to help load down from a carrier method of fishing on mullets in the mangrove creeks where light is used against the floating sleeping mullets; as the light dazzles their eyes, catcher uses his net-bag to bail them in. It is peculiar to Isaka people. The mullet so caught is called danịdèkẹ
to point that way; to support; to face or challenge
mullet caught by light (lamp) fishing
fishing port
wide, broad
complacently; sitting satisfactorily
to receive or bring in also dàókí
receiver
to receive and pass on
to end or stop
infinite; unlimited, endless
to hold on; to stop a process; prevention
to direct in; to pass in; to admit also ókíchú
to snap (photograph)
picture
xerox, photocopier
camera; photo
straight away; directly; objectively
boldly facing some eventuality or effrontery
to discipline
to misdirect; to pervert
scratchy, irritating
to roll about on the surface of the ground
to pick off by scratching e.g. the behaviour of a cock or hen; to comb the hair
to pick off with condemning effect; to push off as declared bad or unfit protruding, turgid, hanging, shooting out
indented to last stage as of a hungry child's stomach
usually applied to end of counting series e.g. siidam, soidam; also sharp, dot, exactly
to face a rival
opposite, facing one another
diamond (<Eng.)
to receive, take
to face; to rise against; attack; to undertake a challenge
to direct out; remove out; take out
some; some people
to expand or distend to a breaking point
to aim and plan or measure; like surveying
to straighten or put erect or right; to discipline also dàgbúkúkúmà something
to drive
dáā v dànịdè`$kè nf Dàbárà p.n.
a. dàbàràmá adv
dàbó v dàbò$ n dàbǒrómà v dàáchíẹ v dàáchíẹká a. dàchíẹmà v.n dàchú v dàchúa v
n dàchúa-másínì n dàchúayé n
dàdá adv dàdàmá adv dàgbúkúkúmà v dàírímà v dàkàdàká a. dákálà v dálā v
dálásîn v dálí a. dálílí a. dám suf
dàmá v dàmàdámá a. dámònì n dàókí v dàpáká v dàpákúmà v dàpù n dàpúu v dàtón v dàtékérémà v dàyè n déē v
27
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
déé# v dèé v.aad
j dèbò$ n
dèbò$nyànàká a. dèbò$nyànàkàbò$ n dèbò$ófóríbǒ n débùlù n déchū v
Dédè p.n. dèdé n dédē v dèdè bíe adv dèdèfúnfùn n dèín n.a. dèinmá n.ad
SF
English gloss
to sit together in a group for a meeting or function
to settle or sediment like mixed or dirty water, gari, salt in container
husband, (pl.) dèàpù
having no husband, husbandless
woman having no husband
widow; one who has lost her husband by death
table (<Eng.)
to drive in used when directing chickens or animals into their places of rest
family in Agba Biri
morning
to tread; to press softly, patting with care
in the morning
very early morning about 5-6 a.m; first appearance of day-light
cool; gentle; peaceful; quiet; calm
peace; peacefully
fish of the mullet group
deck or decking (<Eng.)
to carry or lift
well ground; masticated or beaten into powder or slimy substance as of grains like pepper, maize, okra, etc.
to defeat or conquer
to lift up
to exalt; to raise in rank
to take away; to remove totally
to take away with an aim of claiming or possessing
to pup to flight; to drive away
to cast out; to expel
to sell
seller
to drive aside; ostracise; to cast off
cast away; to exorcise as of evil spirit
consonants of the alphabet; having to do with sound
to touch slightly with something like pin, fire, stick, sword
to struggle, to try; attempt
pointedly; directly
burnt
to burn
burn on the skin
to burn off totally as of devouring burning of bush
to effect motion by paddling, pedalling, driving mechanically transport; means of transport; transport ways or methods shea-butter made from sheanuts, used in massaging as ointment; a product from North of Nigeria
style of dress for men, sewn like a big flowing long-sleeve shirt; its seams fall to the ankle of the legs; it is mostly worn by wealthy men and chiefs
to meet someone expectedly or unexpectedly
dirt; unclean something; untidiness (<Eng. dirty)
dèkè dékì dékī dékídékí
dékígbín dékíchièmà dékígólólómà dékīsîn dékīsó démángímà dépákúmà dèrí
dèrìbò$ désíkímà
désîn
deyepụkọ
dóō
dódólī
dóinmà
dókī
dókímā
dókīyē dókímā-kósímā dòkú dòkuò`$rú
dòlí dónà
dònìá dòtí
v nf n
v
a.
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
v
n
v
v
n
v
v adv a.
v n v v n n
n
v n
fm
28
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
D, d
D,d
dàá v
v
n dàbò$ n dàdá n
dàdíkì v.n dàgíén v dàgíén-másínì n dàkàdíkì n.v.
dámángá n dápá n dàrà n dárí v
a.
n dárímà v dàrìmā v
dáwó n.v dáwò v dá wókíkáyé n dáwómá v dàwù n
dě'ín a. děkí v v dìá v dìá v
dìamá v dìaókí v dìá-ọkíbìayè n dìáókíyé n dǐán n dìán n dèé v dìeàyé n dìeàyè n dìe bélémà v dǐéín n
dìekìrì n dìepákúmà v
SF
English gloss
consonant, the sixth letter of the Okrika alphabet to angle, fishing with hook and line
to imitate or mimic
father
father
term to address a father also ádà (Ogu dialect); pàpá (foreign)
to test; examination; temptation
to copy; to reproduce what is original; to transcribe
photostat machine
test, used when a dedium for testing is applied e.g. when one's electrical system is faulty and he is required to use something to effect the repair, that instrument stands as dakadiki (verb or noun) noun) family shrine where the family meets to ceremonise and libate
pond; brook; ocean
small fragment of stick; conflagrable pieces of chopped wood
to boil; to move in a vexatious mood to an offender in a way to express extreme anger
boiling, foaming
used in praise of someone who proves expertise of an art, thus dáríbé to cause to boil
to give way, to move out of a place; to shift from a position
dream
to learn
vision also bò$ị-òríyè
to teach; to cause someone to learn
father ascribed to a someone; a father belonging to someone (his father, her father)
tumescent like the genital organs when one is in heat
to wean a child; to bring up or nurse a child (orphan) from babyhood to surround an enemy territory during warfare
to laugh at
to share; to barter, trading by exchange of commodity, a common practice during the manila currency in Okrika
to share into
to inherit
legacy, inheritance
heritage, share also dìekìrì
trap for animals, figuratively used to mean entangling someone
deep section of sea
to share; divide; show
gifts, presents
teaching, doctrine
vindicate; reveal
trapping instruments; a device usually consisting of a noose, for capturing animals or birds; also, small carved sticks for toothpick and also used for chaining small fishes like mudskipper or mudfish or meat; arrow
share, portion
to declare, execute; to show by proof, manifest
29
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
dìepíríyè n díkí n dìkí v dìkìadíkía a. dìkìálímà v dìkìbáláfà v dìkìbíebǔ v Dìkìbò$ p.n. dìkìbò$tòrùbáláb a.n álá
dìkìbûgèrèré v.n dìkìbûngùngú v
dìkìbûnwónwó v
dìkìbûtón$ v dìkìdâ v dìkìdìkìtórú n dìkìídérímà v.n dìkígàní v dìkìmá v díkí-óbǒ n dìkípùkòsòlí v dǐkírí n
dìkìsímà v dìkìtíbífóin v dìkìtòrùgbéìn a. dìkìtórúfúká a. dìkìtórúsín v
v dìmá v
dì'n v.a. dín n dínkón n dínkórú n
v dínkórúbǒ n dínlásàpú n dín-ógbó n dìpí v dírí n
dírífí a.
dírígúọ v díríkórí v díríkóríapú n dǐrímá n dírípánbà n dírítólì n dírí-ógúzì n
SF
fm
English gloss
gifts, offering
rope
to look
opposite; face to face to despise
to fear; to respect with fear
to hate to abhor
family in Okrika, living in Amanungo Biri
period of the day when one rarely identifies somebody; early night; dusk
to have mercy; compassion
to have an objectionable feeling for something and thereby to avoid it e.g. bad smell, rotten or unclean thing
to hate with jealousy; feeling resentment against someone's success or progress or behaviour
to avoid; to restrain oneself from some other group or thing or act
to imitate; to copy
providence
to look down on someone
to rebuke; to upbraid; to vex
to follow someone's footsteps; to imitate
musical bow also díkí-ónúnù
to have envious eye on; to covet also sólī
place at the family shrine containing a number of small clay pots (òkòmá)
to despise
to be sympathetic; to have a feeling of mercy for someone
splendid; beautiful, presentable
jealous, envious, feeling ill will against someone's well being
to forgive
to be unconcerned with
to change; to disguise; to convert
to have thorough knowledge of some art; expert
night
snake that moves at night, fond of eating eggs (lit. night fishing) vigil, wake-keeping
to keep awake like the night watch man
night watch man
the aged
midnight
to bury, to plant
book; treatise; medicine
susceptible, capable of receiving as of human body e.g. oju dirifị i.e, body, that can easily admit medicine for cure or poison, also dying of poison as one who dies as a result of poison
to make medicines; to cure with medicine
to indulge in making medicine for evil intention like a witch-craft witches; wizards; necromancers
rings of flesh around the neck
page in a book; leaf of a book
letters of the alphabet
package of tobacco
30
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
dò$kí v dò$kìbó v dò$kìká v dò$kìmámú v dò$kìpákúmábǒ v dò$kìpákúmábò$ n dò$kọdò$kó a. dònwú n dónwú n dórī v dǒró n dòròkú v dòsí v dǔū v dûā v dû;abǒ n dûabǒrómà n dûabǒrómábò$ n dûapákúmà v.n dûapákúmábò$ n 'dùbá a. dù`$bàsábá a. dǔchúa v dǔfí v dùkō v dûkó v dùkòàyè n dùkòdûbámà v dǔkómá a. dùkòmàdǔkómá a.adv dùkòmũ v dùkònyànàyé n dùkònwéngí v
dùkòpákúmà v dùkòpúnúmà v dùkòsímà v.n dùkòtélímá v dùkòyè n dù↓ kú v dù↓ kùká v dú↓kúnó n dú↓kúnóbò$ n dú↓mínéyà n dú↓mō n
a. dú↓módápà n
dú↓mókókò v.n. dú↓mómà v dú↓mónyáná- a. bérénì
dú↓mó-ólô a.v
SF
f f
English gloss
to look for; to want; to search; to wish; yearn for
to realise; to perceive; to observe
not bothered about; not to find or look for; not to want
to get on finding or looking for; to be in search of
to discover
discoverer; founder
small in number and size
large fish regarded as mammal
ringworm
to weave
barracuda, Sphyraena spp.
to jubilate; shout for joy
skip; jump
to use a container to get food or water out from another container to defend someone against an attacker; to save
saviour; a defender; salvager
saving grace (biblical)
saviour (biblical)
deliver, rescue
deliverer, rescuer
large, fat, big
exceeding
to put in or fill from another
to scoop and eat as of cereals
to inform; to tell
chewing-stick
news; information tidings; gossips
to extol; to magnify; to talk big of
next, following
following each other in succession also ìmbìkàmbìká
to follow up, to pursue, to chase, to accompany
subject
to follow some one; to accompany; to form company with another companionship
to declare, to confess
to accuse; to charge innocently
to reproach; blame; guile; revile; slander; to condemn someone
to persuade
statement, report; an account of speech
to allow; to permit
to disallow, refuse
steering part of a canoe or ship; a stern
steersman; the person who directs the course of the canoe or ship mermaid immortalised by a masquerade
life
alive
fountain of life
sustenance also dǔmó-ólò
to make alive
lively faith
maintaining life; nourishing
31
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
dù&n n dûóín n d[úóín-ámá n dûọíndín v
dûóíndípínyó n dûóínfúlà n
dûóínwárí n
dûpárí n dûpō n dùró n dǔsín v dǔvàì v
E, e
E,e p
e! excl. èe! excl. ébé n
èbebà n èbedè n èbejì n èbelè=òbelè n èberá v èbèré adv èdènì n
Èdèrèmè Bìrì p.n. édí n
Éférífé p.n.
efùléfù n a.
ègúsí n égbē n ègbèlèrémè=ògbèl n èrémè
ègbèrì n ègbèrìfíeyé n ègbèrìgbèín v
ègbèrì-ná-àkà-nà- n
SF
English gloss
giraffe
ghost; dead body; evil spirit; fairy
hell; sheol; fairy land
to mourn for the dead by wearing black dress or refraining from putting on fine dress
cemetery; a place of burial; burial ground
dry spittle found at the angles of the mouth especially after sleep, as one wakes from bed
family ancestral home regarded traditionally as the central shrine of the family; house of the ancestral parents
rock; stone
plank, wooden board
that portion of the canoe where the steerer rests his legs; also dùròbíe to remove liquid from a container by using a bailoer, or cup or spoon to bail and dash out in splash
vowel, the seventh letter of the Okrika alphabet
precaution or warning expression, checking oneself from danger; also, derisively applied against a person or object by demonstrating exclamation commonly used in gossiping and anecdotage, meaning a look down
water-fence for fishing usually adopted by the Ikwere people at their water sides along the brink of the bush
threat signalling fright; frightening somebody also tọrúchúa respectable headwear or hat, usually broad brimmed; sombrero hat ocean or wide fishing ground (<Kalabarị) cf. Okrika àbàjì
calabash keg or container mostly used in containing palm-wine
to sympathise with someone who is bereaved or has been in trouble long since; since; quite long ago
altar; an elevated place at the hearth under which fire is made for drying fish or meat
ward or area in Okrika
bear, a mammal, fond of moving by night [<Igbo] Okrika call it mónómángì
old time masquerade with double face and decorated in a flowing gown, owned by Jama family. It usually carries broom in hand with which it strikes the ground and prays oputibèya sisi
flower of cotton tree (sikaka)
description of one with unworthy character and standard; vagabond condiment used in thickening soup
hammerkop; hammer-headed stork
respectable women of a traditional descent who help to maintain morality and check unchastity among adolescent girls
drama; story
riddle; a conundrum
to dramatise a play e.g. owu display when a new owu display is staged; it is shown for three days, the third day is set aside for ceremonies that is ègbèrìgbèín (the day of ceremonies)
politics; political practice
ms
32
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
míẹmíẹye ègbèrì-ná-àkà-nà- n ògbó
éjé n ékè n èkèbìrì n
èkèké n èkémbà n ékéké adv éképáìn v ékéré n
SF
f
f mi
English gloss political party; pọlịtịk-ogbo political group
tree sp.
mark; borderline
smallest mudskipper (íchìlá) Periophthalmus papilio; also smallest sardine
sign of hunger; when anxiously desirous to eat; when hunger disturbs smallest size of sardine, Sardinella spp. (cf. sóngú)
in line; line by line; according to marks
to jubilate, shouting and croaking
wooden gong used for proclamation
drumming played in honour of an important dead chief or warrior
to shout with anger; roar, bark, scold in loud tone
to trespass, lit. to overdo or pass mark
bosom, chest, breast
peace of mind; inward satisfaction
small short talking-drum commonly used by necromancers (tórú-tó lúápú) during the burial of their member; it is also used during the pérígó ceremony of a dead chief
agile rhythmic dance danced to special drum produced by water-pot (nngú) music
herbaceous plant used as medicine
expression of disdain
play ground, open space
high jump stand (Ogoloma dialect)
traditional season when it is believed the dead visit the town from their fairy land; during this period nobody weeps if somebody dies (see appendix 1)
lump of carved meat or flesh, usually the limbs, hand or leg measure of drink by bottle also èlèkèdì-òlólò
indirect behaviour of some habit; to pretend
sign, mark
test; attempt
change of circumstance; inevitable condition (mostly used in parables) obs.
swamp exposed to tidal influence
corridor
orange fruit
people in OTELGA, living near Okrika
open field
pigeon
small flat fish like the sole
manatee, seacow, Trichechus senegalensis
vegetation in brackish waters; the leaves are lineal in shape
bad bush situated nearly opposite Kalio-ama where Ibaka people bury dead people of questionable feature
throne; adored seat
rain
crossed bar put up for sports-high jump, hurdles, obstacles etc.
day; time or period
n mi èkèrìá v
ékésábà v èkpè n èkpèdèín=kúbíe- n dèín
ékpèrè n ékpètè n
n
élê excl.
élē n n èlèchú n
éléké n èlèkèdí n élékí n.v élékímà n
v èlèkìwú n
èlèlá n èlèléndà n élèléndà n Èlémé n éléógbô n èlésìká n èlèténdē n èmèín n éméngía n èmèngìá-bíe n
èmìnè n énē n n éné n
mi dc
f f
33
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
énébā n. énédīn n. énédûpárímgbòlù n énégóyēgóyē n énéíchítà n énékákà n énékúbù n énémì n énémímgbuù`@ n énémígbìnbò& n énémíkòrō n énéógbóìn n énésán n énétíbì adv ènyē n
v èpèlè n
épèlégbò n
èpèlènì n èpèlèpé n èpèpé n èpérèré=ìpérèré n
éré n érébárā a.n érébárángà a.adv érébû n ér'ddǐa n
érédǐkí v.n
érédǐkíbǒ n érédǒkí v éréménì n éréméníángà n
éréméníáwò n éréméníbò$ n éréméníekìnè n
éréménítòkù n érésárá v.a. érésélé v.a.
érésímé v.n érétí v
SF
English gloss
tomorrow; day-break; the first appearance of day light in the morning night (Ogoloma dialect)
hailstone
everyday
showers of rain afternoon; daylight daylight
palm-fruit palm-fruit palm-cutter
palm tree
mid-day, noonday; afternoon
nightfall; night
daily, each day, everyday
line of meshes of a net
to watch carefully as a spy; to spy; to audit an account book ònyē$ game played on draughtboard, a sedentary occupying two contestants one on each end; seeds or plates are displayed on the squares. The seeds are designed to varied permutations by one for the other to disfigure and vice versa, until the game ends. It is like chess; it is nicknamed ábìlì.
water yam; carved water yam used during the ceremony of "perigo" (see appendix) at the instance of the burial of an important man dissemblers, tricksters
horn; pipe; trumpet
sun, morning or evening sunshine
fish like kigbo commonly found in brackish or fresh water
women, females
left; left-hand
left-hand side
vagina – also bùkú
exchange of women (it used to be a custom that if House A gives out a woman in marriage to House B, as time goes on, B pays back to A from the progeny
watch or spying of women's nakedness. This is done by immoral fellows who are in the indecent habit of watching or spying the nudity of women in their latrine area during defecation
man who practises the habit of spying women's nakedness
having numerous casual affairs with women; to womanize
women
women's side; a place where women resort to for disguising and easing themselves
young women (plural of "eremenitọkụ")
lady, woman (singular form of eremeni)
term ascribed to the secrecy of women's mood as related to mensis; privacy; and nudity (see ìjìbàsò)
young woman or lady also iremenitoku
denying marriage to women by frequently divorcing wives
fond of selecting women for marriage; accepting and denying marriage promises to intending wives
to marry a woman; marrying of women
to flirt; being fond of women's company; to have sexual intercourse
34
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
érétíbífìyè=érétíbí n yè
érétú v éréwórí v.n
éréyá v.n
éréyímá v éséné n éséníe num. été n ètèbì n
étérà n étèté n
èwèkéréngè adv èwèkérērē adv èwèrènwú n
Ẹ, ẹ
SF
ms
English gloss
ẹ,ẹ
ẹba n
ẹbe n
ẹbẹ n ms
ébèkébèkè=óbèké adv bèkè
èbè`$lí v
v
v ébèrè` n n
eè excl. eèè excl. éféférí n éféré n èfèrébà n èfèréyà n ègèlèmà a.n
ègèné n
égbégbé=ógbégbé nf ékéké n
trapping women into love making; luring women
detesting women's company; fond of abusing women and their companionship; popular traditional masquerade among the "kiriowu" masquerades
performing of lawful marriage; the ceremony of lawful marriage of women
to assist a female in giving birth, as of a midwife
loudest drum among other instruments used during ọbọnị dance
nine in counting
drinking cup of calabash material
special feather decoration prepared like sunflower used on masquerades
mat, couch
small fish, fairly greenish in colour and mostly found at the water sides, also called ábágō
just now, not long ago
and then; than; hitherto; now then; at this time, also wèkérērē three-leaved yam; also, tụn (Ogun dialect)
vowel, the eighth letter of the Okrika alphabet
gari soaked with hot water (<Y oruba)
altar
ancient masquerade owned by the Anyengu-Biri people; it is usually played with satellite masks such as obirinangulo, bèrebò, okpokiriobolo, owuọkpara, onanaowu, okule, etc. Its full name is Okulemeni-ẹbẹ.
probably, peradventure; perhaps, maybe
to move carefully amidst shrubs and hanging ropes
to pursue or track someone under hide and seek
to use some material to underline an adornment in making a dress xylophone, keys placed on plantain stems
style of cloth-tying adopted by women where the last fold at the back is hoodshaped
?
?
scales on the body of fish or mammal
dish; plate of earthenware material; corrugated iron sheet
notorious female mermaid
notorious male mermaid
noticeable point of difference; turning point; climax; big in size; also ègèlèmàbàrá
marked edge or line on a dress; the top fin or sting on a fish; sign of healing change of a sore
powerful large fish like the ray and of the cartilaginous group
piece of broken clay pot or pitcher generally used in frying groundnut
with a woman dowry
35
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS ékélì n
ékémà v éképú n èkèrè n èkèrí v
n èkpèín n èlé n
èléjì n èmbè n émbémà èmémbū=òmémb n. ū
éndé=óndé num. èndè n èndèm@ n
èndègbèlúgbòlú n
énémé n ènèmèkì n èngèmá v éèn excl. ènhê excl. énwé=ónwé) a.
n énwéí a.n
ènwènè=ònwènè n a.n
ènyē n v
èpèré=òpèré v épépèrí n éré=óré n èréchì adv éréchín n èrédù n
érépàká a. érépàkàpù n éréré v.a. érésó a. èwèrèwé n
SF
English gloss
or dry fruits; potsherd
wide round flat tray woven in warp and weft with cane, used in spreading dry or fresh fish
to filter or sifter as of water and food material
calculated sizes or demarcations
fishing material conical in shape woven in form of a longish basket
to bend in order to avoid hanging shrubs and tendrils in the bush or the lintel of a door
small bird
he-goat, also, ẹkpẹịn
fish of the mullet group, fond of eating black swamp, and usually full of fat
lead
chance, privilege, vacancy, area, way, etc.
?
sand-fly, gnats
four hundred
gum, the flesh covering the bases of the teeth; also èndè (ọndẹ)
nit. the egg stage of louse hanging on the hair
term given to child birth at short intervals; children born at short intervals, looking short in size
black paint or dust from charcoal; also wax from the smoke of lamp iron wood; also called akawai (<Kalabarị)
to filter; to sediment
No!
Aha, alas
indelible; thorough
feeling of constriction in the chest and coughing asthma
very small crab; very small; inedible
rattle-bells tied to the wrist or ankle during dancing
blue eyes like those of a white man
line of meshes of a net
to watch carefully as a spy; to check or audit account (diriẹnyè); to spy; also, ọnyẹ
to belch
light leaf
name; wood used in carving canoes
because of, on account of
roll call
aerial yam produced through flower, not by tuber (Dioscorea bulbifera) whose inner rind is violet in colour. It is sweet in taste. notable, famous
nobles, notables
developing gradually like fire; sore etc.
famous, renowned
fur of animals around the neck; mane
f
c
36
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS F,f
F,f
fàá a. fàbò$ n fàbàlàká n fàdàkìbó n fàfàkà a. fákpè id
fálí a. fàmā v v
fàngākpè v.a. fàngàlā a.v fàntí n
fárí1 v fárí2 v fàsín a. fàyè1 n.a. fàyè2 n fé v
n fébǒ n féchírí n fédìá n
féférī v fékéféké a. féképù a.v féképùmà adv fèlè a. fèlèmâ adv féní n féníí n féníběsè p.n.
féníbò$ n
féníbǒrómá v fépókù n fépùfépù a. fí v fì n fìí v fìá a. fíáfíá a.
n fíáfíáká a.
fíafíagbúnyè n fìa káfíakà a.
SF
English gloss
consonant, the ninth letter of Okrika alphabet
lost, finished
term usually attributed to a vagabond, who forgets his home risk-taking
perdition; spiritual ruin or damnation, destruction; danger
unfinishing, never ending, eternal
expression to describe the sluggish and noisy movement of the tortoise (onomatopoeic).
lifted or raised, usually applied to someone with raised lips (bípī fálí) to settle or finish a squabble
to lose
to guard one's loins, to be fully prepared against any eventuality or task wrap, entwine, entangle
style of skirt tied with rope around the waist spreading down to the ankle also pòtíkòto
to beat drum or play an instrument
to sharpen a knife
perished totally
lost thing
commonly used as abbreviation of the name Fayeofori
to buy
market
buyer
market, market place or square
lit. (buying and sharing, exchanging) that is, trade by barter, a custom commonly practised in the days of manila currency
to get close to someone with a view to creating familiarity
light in weight
carried in toto; to rise for a move all at once adv. fekepuma
rising suddenly
slow; sluggish
sluggishly, lazily, stealthily
bird; name for colourful flannel cloth; omen
customers
god of thunder, usually regarded as the supreme god of the Okrika gods
market person; customs or being one who patronises someone's business
giving a sign of omen
market port, that is, the waterside of a market, same as market place pulsating, throbbing interpretation of reflex act (onomatopoeic)
to eat
death
to die
being on good terms; friendly; not inimical
clean; holy
applied to cleanliness with serenity and respect
unclean, dirty
mystery
questionable, uncertain, doubtful
37
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS fìán n
fíangá n
fìbí v fìbò$ n fíbǒ n fìrìbûbárásín v.n fìrìb'ùsîn v fìrìbûsó n.v fìrìfìrìmá v fìrìfìrìmà-dìrí n fìríjì n fìrìkìrī n fìrìmā v fìrìnwèngí v fìrìnwèngìbǒ n fìr;ìnwèngìàpú n fìrìnwèngì- n kárífíyè
fìrìsō v físánĩ n físín v físó v fítúrú n
fíyé n fíyéálálì n fíyégbéíndù`$pàrì n fíyésékókō v fó a. fòfō a. fòfàmâ v.a. fòí v.a. fòìán v.n fòìfíyé n
fóín a. fókófókō a. fòmbàrá n fòmú v fòmyé = fòmùyé n fóōn n fònbílō-běkà excl.
fóngú n fóngúmā v.a.
fóngúm íné v fónjú n fónō v foò`$mâ adv fóómâ v
SF
English gloss
faeces, excrement, manure, dung, shit, excreta
where one's aim is based on eating and enjoying; fond of eating or lavishing
to reduce by evaporation; to minimize
dead person
eater; user
to resign from work; to retire; resignation
to be retrenched; to sack
retirement; to retire
to send on message
letter, epistle
fridge (<English)
office; work place; company premise, fìrìàkìrí pl.
to send on an errand
to work; to do some work
workman; messenger
workmen; messengers
oath of office; also fìrìnwèngì-òrú
to get employed in an engagement or office alligator pepper
to finish eating; to eat up
to eat off; to clear by eating
bread (changed from fitoru i.e. edible chalk, bread being as white as chalk)
food
feasting; conviviality; merrymaking
grinding stone; millstone
to nourish; to feed
vacant; hollow
aloof; good and free spacing
give space; making space; spacious roast, roasted
drag; disputing with someone; argument
food that precedes the major meal; snacks, breakfast, lit. (roasted food), usually regarded as light food
swollen
light and not heavy, as of bread having much air space
punishment
to flog or beat up
material for flogging like cane or whip
dust, ashes
idiomatic expression in Ogu dialect meaning ‘God forbid’ as Okrika would say ‘Kpakpa-sisi’
rainy season
to invoke, to invoke the spirit of the dead; splashing as of rain into an open door
to celebrate a season of jubilation e.g. dancing, masquerading etc. tobacco pipe
to drag along; to pull or draw along
quietly or silently resting and watching; lying at ambush in silence
to quieten; to appease as of a crying child; to pat a crying child to
38
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS fòrókò n
fóróró a.
fórú n fórúbíe-òkùèìn n.v fósà a.n
fòsímè v
fúà excl. fùá n fúarō n
fúayē n fúbárá n fùfú n fúkā a. fùkú v. fúkū a. fúkúmá v
fúlā n f ú l ó  n fùlùlùfúlúlú a. fúmma v
fúmú n.v fún n.a. fún n fúrō n
SF
English gloss
silence
singlet (<Eng. frock)
saying nothing, being embarrassed with mouth opened ajar; looking agape
wind, breeze, tempest, sea-waves
telephone
something attained without labour; of no use or importance; loss without a feeling (coined)
to be sorry for an offence on somebody or mishap on somebody; expression usually announced to appease or condole a wounded or an offended or bereaved person
expression to ward off evil; also súà; to condemn something or pronounce a curse; to forbid
in-law; mother-in-law of a man, he addresses her, ìyàfùá, ìyà-fùró, fúarō; she addresses him, ìfóìn; all pertaining to in-law
title or term given to a man's wife's mother by the relatives of the husband both male and female
presents pertaining to dowry on a woman also ógóbáráfìyè or ógófíyè forehead; lucks; front view
lungs (also, sì-pàràngá); also foreign name for decomposed cassava painful, aching
to jump or skip
tight handed; miserly; one who rarely shares with another also íkī
to handover something by throwing it, that is, causing it to fly to reach the receiver
spittle, saliva
soup
unsteady; slippery in behaviour or movement
to cause to be half-dead or suffocated as of treatment on mudskipper when being prepared for curing
epilepsy; fainting; to faint
salt; bitter
refuse; particles
family; tribe; stomach; womb
small pad like pillow placed under the belly of the masquerade nicknamed fíngí
freeborn; indigene; son of the soil; an aborigine
odorous; bad smelling
to steal
honest; honesty
to dust; clean up either by some material of the hand
to wipe off; to clean off
name or expression given to plantain or banana that bears plenty of fruits; lit. "stolen unnoticed", also applied to mixed up keeping of money where shortage cannot be easily detected
period of darkness; the period when there is no moonshine throughout the night
football (<Eng.)
fúrótèrèyé
fúrótòkù fúrū
fúrú fúrúká fúrúmā fúrúmásín fúrúnemìkâ
fúrúméngí fútúbólì
n ms
n a. v a.n v v n
n n
39
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS G, g
G,g
gàbàràmá adv
gáduruma adv
gàgá a. gàgàmâ adv gàgàràgágárá a. gàgùrùgágúrú a.
gáịn excl. gáịngáịn a. gàlàgàlá a. gálílí a. gálú a. gàmgàm a. gàmgàmmá adv gàmùmùmá adv gánáná a. gàpìmâ adv gàràgàrá a. gárágárá a. gàràgárà n gárám$gárám$ a.adv
gárápùmà adv gàrí n
gásímà adv gèé part.
SF
English gloss
consonant, the tenth letter of the Okrika alphabet
standing or sitting in a mood descriptive of being annoyed, vexacious and challenging
standing stubbornly in a challenging manner, possibly with goggling eyes
strong and taut
trying with much effort, endeavour fervently
as of hard chewing-stick in the mouth, not elastic, coarse and indelicate coarse in the mouth as of unripe pawpaw; loose and lacking liquid or saliva
exclamation denoting deafness
warm not hot
scattered, not located at a place
tumescent, standing erect and tough
disappointed, embarrassed
brisk in walking; forceful in moving or marching
moving or walking forcefully
mood presenting a challenge especially as shown by the eyes
bright and piercing; also gáníní
standing stubbornly as if threatening to fight
well dried as of cloth, fish, food and cereals
usually applied to a healthy body especially as of a smart person
bitter kola (Ogu dialect) [<Ogoni] also àkáín
forceful in action; rapacious
cutting off or disconnecting automatically e.g; rope, relationship by friendship or family usually (gárápùmà pèlé)
staple food made from cassava tuber prepared with hot water for swallowing; also eaten with cold water and sugar or coconut or fish (<Y oruba)
pointedly, plainly, directly
commonly used after verbs to entreat someone to take the action of the verb e.g. so gee (please go/go now); ọkuè`ịn gèé (talk now/please talk); fí gèé (eat now/please eat)
bow-legged
sizable; big; reasonably good for consideration
to crack; quake
statutes
crack by itself; cracking or breaking open as of land slide or rock or any brittle domestic article such as earthenware, glass, clay pot, etc. being weakened by the result of much physical exertion arising from fighting or accident
high, lofty, tall; also gélélé
height
roaming about, unsteady in situation
heights; cliffs
mansion, edifice, magnificent building
reasonable in size; large; considerable adv. gemmá
capable of breaking or cutting sharply e.g. sugar-cane, stick etc. shivering; nervous; highly excitable
to slice lengthwise e.g. slicing of cassava, yam etc. also séngí
a. gègé a.
gèín v gèìn-òlókò n gèínpù a.v
gélè a.
gélé a. gélè n gèlègèlé a. gélényó n gélé-ópúwàrì n gém a. gémē a. gèrègèré a. gèrí v
gèbèr é
40
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
gésímà adv gíám adv.e
xcl. gídá n gíén v
gìẹnígíẹní a. gìẹnpū v
gígì n
gígí a. gínígíní a. gìnìní a.
a.n gíọngíọn a.
gírā v gírírì a.
gírírí n
gírígírímà adv
góō v góbóyé n gọdò$gọdǒ a. gódóín a.
gódóró a. gódǔkò a. gògòbǒ n gólī v
gólì n gòlígòlí a. gólí-ígání n gòlòló a. góm(ú) n
gónógónò a. górógóró n.a. gòròró a.v gósè adv gòvínà n
gọvment = gọmẹt n góyēgòyē quan
t. gùá v
SF
English gloss
really, pointedly, actually (<Ijọ)
gripping some one unexpectedly; an expression of unexpected grip of someone
apple
to write
lustrous, shining glossily
to crack on its accord not forced like any brittle material e.g. glass, coconut, shell
decorated canoe with a canopy, generally used in conveying chiefs and notables [<Eng. gig]
tight; firm; taut
dim as of eyes, not seeing clearly
loose and irregular as of the meshes of a net when some knots become loose
when relationship is not smooth-running e.g. husband and wife; two friends not being on good terms or harmony
sparkling; crystal clear as of water
to struggle, to do something with some pain of exertion, to play aimlessly on the ground creeping here and there, like a child
quick and sudden, thus gírírìmà adv.
cloth purse hemmed with zip usually tied to the waist by market women; zip
in a moving crowd especially during ceremonies like burial, Ịrịa, meetings etc.
to read; to mention
destiny
untidy, awkward, clumsy
sounding in the head, echoing and ringing in the head as for one who hears faintly
stalwart, huge, gigantic
ascribe, recount, mention
namesake; one who bears a similar name with another ; also agogo
to abuse in silence (usually during gossips); to spark quarrelling attitude
gold (<Eng.), also score at football
golden
reproach, query
high, elevated
floating material or symbol used by anglers and fishermen mostly, to indicate the position and presence of their fishing lines and nets as par the tide; buoy placed by the Marine Department
straight on; along the stretch of road or course
light pepper soup prepared with fresh or dry fish or meat
scratch, rub lightly making some mark
therefore, on account of; why
leader in a dancing group (<Eng.) changed from "governor"; the governor of a state
government, the word that, stands for the ruling power (<Eng.)
every (usually applied to persons, things, periods etc.) thus, tombò- goyegoye (every person), sịkị-goyegoye (every time), ye-goyegoye (every thing), etc.
to mix or put together
41
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS gúā n.v
gùàmā a. gúàmgúàm id.
p.n. gúdā v
gùègùé a.
gùgú n
gúgū v
gùgùgùmá adv
gúgūsîn v gùlè n
gúlù n gùlùgùlú id.
gúlúgúlúmā v gúmā v gúnū v gúnú n.v gúnúgúnū v gúō v gúorò n gúosì adv gúrō v gúrómāsín v gúrú n
GB, gb
GB,gb
gbá adv gbáà excl. gbàdàràmâ adv gbàgbàrìmá v
gbáì excl.
SF
English gloss
act of cursing someone who wrongs another as he encounters misfortune a retaliatory expression (usually the pronouncement is the word "kpùwáì" or "kpùwáịkā" meaning it serves you right
of mixed character; dealing with various subjects; miscellaneous disorderly; carelessly; impatiently rough Gùàrá
town in BOLGA
to eat voraciously, to make merry; indulge in boisterous festivities
shy, inactive, exhibiting stage fright ass when an actor or a performer behaves when he appears on the stage or in public e.g. a masquerade making its first appearance (the prefix "bu" is usually affixed to it to complete or make its meaning vivid), thus bûgùègùé
silk fish which usually contains itself in broken bottles or tins in the water; it stays in this place and develops; stargazer
to strike out dust from pieces or fragments, and dirt from cloths, containers or paper
behaving in an unbecoming sly manner; not welcoming the presence of people; frowning
to strike out the undesired from a lot; to cast off
tree whose wood is used in carrying out the material known as pàngà (water bailer)
gold earring; earring whether of gold or not (<Eng.)
out of order; scattered as a result of confusion in respect of human beings; entanglement in respect of fish in a net; spoilt condition of anything
to ravage, destroy, devastate, scatter
to increase in stench; to diffuse or exude foul air
to fume getting out of temper; to get angry
awful or odorous smell that diffuses the atmosphere of a place
to struggle for release under a tight situation
to cure; to aid someone to good condition of health and vigour
kola nut that has two cotyledons (<Hausa)
suddenly jamming an object (description echoic)
to rub also síkírī
to rub off; to erase
large basket with cover used in storing fish and always placed on the altar at the hearth
consonant, the tenth letter of the Okrika alphabet
time indefinite; for ever; completely spoken as "gbasin" or "gbaso" slapping expression (echoic)
as of door opened wide; also sitting loosely with legs open or scattered to slip especially when the foot slips or when the lip misses the cup, etc.
touch and run; a game children play by touching one another and running away as each toucher announces "gbáì"
large fish with a long bill;
centipede
sound of bell so expressed (echoic) gbáịn-wókó--wókó
to change a plan as a result of some happening
gbáịn nf n
n gbákī v
42
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS gbàkìkìtàlàlá n
gbàkùmá = adv gbàkimá
gbálā v gbàlàmā v gbálámā n gbálí = bûgbálí v gbálímà adv
gbám(ú) a. gbánà v gbànā v gbànìàyé n gbàrí v gbàrìká a. gbàrìmàká adv
SF
English gloss
name of an imaginary mermaid that loafs about irresponsibly; an attribution made to any vagabond
to be concerned with
to collect by picking up respectively
to recoup oneself; to exercise the body
short time fishing tour
carefully prepare oneself for any eventuality
singly and exclusively careful of oneself; disallowing any touch of body
slender, slim
to place on top
to go aground e.g. canoe or ship on a shallow bay
dispute
to miss something
sure; certain
surely; must; without failing
old masquerade played and owned by Amanungo Biri
sizeable, straight mangrove stick
equal, exact
comparatively equal
equally; in actual fact; really; truly
for ever; continuously
for ever
sitting heavily in a sinking chair possibly; sitting complacently in a seat also gbẹdè`$rèmá, gbèrèrèmá
to grind; to cover or cloak; to pay or reward retaliation
to retaliate; to return like for like
to pretend, presume
feigning to excuse oneself or exempt an issue
as if; if
hanging; shaky; not taut, slack
to fry in a dry pot or container without liquid e.g. garri, groundnut etc. idiomatically used to mean beating someone brutally
to ask; to investigate; to take care or notice of; knowing how one fares especially relations
pretentious or ironical expression usually applied to undesirable attitude or happening, generally spoken as "gbèlè-gbélé-gbèlè closely, carefully
lit. to stand against, to confront; to assail, to appear before a person suddenly; besiege; intercept
sober; quietness realised from past experience
to be awake all of a sudden; getting up suddenly
getting at alert suddenly
wide open
leaning backward on an easy-chair or stretcher
descriptive of sluggish or lazy behaviour or someone who does not promptly do things; walking in a clumsy manner
gbásá
gbásí gbàsìá
gbásímà gbásín
gbásó gbẹdè`$gbẹdě
gbèín
gbèìnfíyè gbèìnfíyé-fī` gbèìnmá gbèịnmábûdǔkósí n
gbéké gbèkègbèké gbékénī
gbélā gbèlé
gbélémà gbèmàchíẹ
gbéné
gbérékà gbérékàmà gbérérè gbèrèrèmá gbèrèrè-gbèrèmá
nms n
a.
adv.a
. adv adv adv adv
v
n
v
v ph.w
prep a.
v idio m
v excl.
adv v
a. a.adv adv a. adv adv.a .
43
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
gbérí num. gbìangbíán a. gbídígbídímà adv gbígbí a. gbígbímà adv fbìjìmá adv gbìjìpú a. gbìjìpùmá adv gbíkìgbíkì a.
n gbíkíkì id.
gbíláamà adv gbín v gbíngbólómà v.a. gbínkán v gbínpú v gbìrìpùgbírípú a.
gbìsìrí a. v
gbìsìrìnyo n gbóō = gbọ v
gbóō = gbô v gbôbá v gbóbā v
Gbóbǒ p.n. gbógbó v gbóin n.a. gbóinmà adv gbóinpókí v
gbókì excl. gbókù adv gbòkùlùmá adv gbólō v gbòlòkìá v.adv
gbólómā v gbòlòmā n.a. gbòlú a. gbólú v
gbòlùmâ adv gbón a. gbón-élé n gbónmà adv.a
. gbónmà adv
gbórī v
SF
English gloss
one (in counting) (Ibaka dialect, also Ogoloma dialect) being tossed about
totally; completely (usually preceded with the word "gbéín") tight, firm
tightly, firmly
besieging overwhelmingly; also gbíjámà (Ogu dialect)
dull, cloudy, heavy
looking suspicious with heavy eyes; looking dull
shaky, unsteady like a pinned pole or flag rattling under wind
used as nickname of the fabric linen
descriptive of a sudden action of changing, shaking, drawing, turning gbíkíkìmà
invading or besieging with overwhelming force
to throw at; to weave or sew; to decorate as of masquerade etc.
knit or sew together
to smash or scatter through stoning
to cause inujury or wound by stoning
acutely uneasy looking startled and apprehensive as effected by external force
unlevel
to slip into a low level or sinking spot
ditch; sinking spot; quagmire; bog
to peck; to swallow balls of fufu in eating; to pin something among a lot
to invoke; to push to action; to send
to invoke death on someone
to kill by pecking as of birds of prey e.g. hawk; also killing by snake bite
family in Ogu and Okrika also
to cut with matchet; to butcher
silence, calm, dumbfounded
deafeningly, silently
to be silent about something; to deafen one's ears against someone; to concern oneself with somebody's affairs
expression of sharp cut or breaking
at once; immediately
conspicuously; properly; openly, in open display
to knock or strike
intentional getting together for some special operation; throwing much force combined
to put together
getting together; concerned with
short
to crack someone on the head; to connect the kingpost that rests on a tie-beam to carry the ridge of the roof; to criticise an expression plainly, pointedly
lonely, alone
arid place; desert
lonely; desolate
really, actually (Bolo dialect) to fence
fm
44
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
v
gbórí n gbóríkélímà v gbóríkírìchíẹká a. gbóríkúbíe n.a. gbòrògbòró a. gbótúbárà adv gbótúmà adv gbótúmá-ìnyòsàrà n gbùákà'n v.a. gbùanyò n
gbùdú a.adv gbúkúkù adv gbúlú nf gbúmú n
gbù'n nf gbù'n n
gbù'n n. gbùún a. gbùnyè n gbúrúgbúrù n.ad
v a.
H, h
H,h alph
hám$hám$ a. héhé a.
híin-háàn excl. hìjìá excl.
hó a. Hóín! excl.
hóínyō adv hóróró a.adv hún excl.
húàmà adv
húàmàtólúpáká adv.p .
SF
English gloss
to attack a person from all angles as of sandflies besieging someone; to encompass
one in counting
to encompass; to fence round
not steady, unstable; slippery in behaviour one mind; one accord; united
sizable, big, plenty
at once; immediately
at once; immediately
lit. total rest, retirement
to burst or explode with force; to be wealthy all of a sudden
depths; deep areas
completely full e.g. market gathering or crowd of people
drawing someone by force; in a snatching manner
mullet sp.
bell
fish like the golden fish (ona)
fruit like alligator pepper with sweet succulent pulp
croaker
deep
mystery
rush, streaming without a break or gauge; also ígbúrúgbúrù \w gbúsú
protruding; commonly used in abusive description of someone's buttocks or lips (tùmógbúsú) and (bípí gbúsú)
consonant, the twelfth letter of the Okrika alphabet
vexatious, irascible; rough with anger; getting uncontrollable hamhamma adv.
light; feeling tired
expression used to inspire people during working; also to acclaim during conversation and story-telling
expression to interpret comotony; it is too much; what again? also "ìjìá"
open; vacant; empty
exclamation to call the attention of listeners during story-telling or conversation
then again; starting afresh; begin once again
open hole; easy, go through; bored open
expression to ward off bad odour, usually adopting the manner of using the palm to sweep off the bad odour at the nose
getting out of a dark place or winding course, into the open unexpectedly
bursting out into the open surprisingly e.g. after meandering in a winding creed and then bursting at the open estuary, a missing man suddenly appearing to sight
45
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS I, i
I,i ;I, ị alph ía excl.
íi excl. íbílá n íbílápínjì n Íbíláwáríkírí n
ìbìmìẹ v ìbiọ`$kùèìn n ìbiọ`$kúmá adv ìbìtéịn a. ìbìyémíẹbárá n íbó n
SF
English gloss
vowels, the thirteenth and fourteenth letter of the Okrika alphabet expression of annoyance denoting, "too much for you!", "enough of that!"
expression of annoyance and refusal, meaning why or no
mat made of bamboo material
piece of the inner stuff of bamboo, ibila
historical spot surrounded by Awọlọme, Adedeme and Anyogu ends, noted for a celebration square, where ceremonies are performed dances, masquerading, burial, etc.
to do good; to be kind
gospel; good talk
properly
better, best (always used in the superlative)
good manners, behaviour
deep mud; thick swamp; the idiom "ibó dékí" means great annoyance; heavy thinking or thought
large ray
lying with face downward
upside down; bent like akimbo waist; to lay someone face downward veranda; open space immediately after the main door outside, meant for resting or relaxing
blister
ripe plantain preparation, roasted and pounded into a mixture of crayfish, oil and salt etc. believed to be traditional food for gods and water mermaids
grass (Ogu dialect)
tribal mark made on the face, usually vertical cuts made on the forehead; man with scarified face-most commonly of Igbo origin
used as slang to mean "taken care of"; women in their quarrels abuse one another "tùbǒ íchí" i.e., who cares for you?, who knows you? shameless, immodest, insensible to disgrace also bûgèrèrènémíkà higher degree of some performance or play; a stage of note
thick hair on the skin; furs
caterpillar (larva), an insect, hairy in nature
to dance with keen interest seriously especially with the waist
style of high-jumping with legs stretched sideways and body parallel to the cross-bar
to drift along or in favour of the tide downward; to move downward
to go on the process of moving downward; to shift an anchorage downward i.e. as the tide ebbs
to move down while sitting or standing in a line
to subdue; to be reduced
stream
to gush out
grave; monument; sepulchre
Efik; the name Okrikans give the Calabarians ifìkìapù
my son-in-law; term given to the husband by his wife's mother
metal gong
family in Okrika living in Ayongu Biri
íbó
ìbō
ìbòmā íbómá(bíe)
íbópō
íbóróm = íbrám
ìbùrùá íchí
íchípíní ìchìrìmà íchúká íchúká-ófírímà íchúkú ídábárà
ídérì ídérímà
ìdèrìmà
ídérímèngì ídérìpákábó ídǔpú
Ìfìkì
ìfóìn
ìgílà
Ígírá ìgìràmàngí
nf a.
a.v
n
n n
n n.v
v
a. n n n v n
v v
v
v
n
v
n p.n. n
n
p.n. fm
46
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
ígírí n ìgò n ígó n ìgòdò n ìgònìbìanwàrí n ìgònìbǒ n ìgònìkón v.n ígú n
ìgù n ìgùángī n ígúeìn n.a. ígbé n ìgbìkì n ìgbìkìkùnō n
ìgbìkìnàbárámá ph.w ìgbìkìnàbáránā
ígbírí n
ígbírírárí v ígbírígídí n
ígbírígúgú v
ìgbò n
ígbō n ìhè excl.
ìhèbě excl.
íin excl. íjérè n ìjìbàsò n
SF
English gloss
ìjìkìlà n
hotel, guesthouse
stranger
hospitality; hospitalize; to entertain a visitor
hard mud of swamp nicknamed "chikoko" commonly used in reclaiming land
famous old set of dancing masquerades played by Ambeme Biri
money (obs)
poor, poverty
box
money, currency
or the end of the counting system i.e. twenty "poku" or 20 times 8000 (160,000) which could agreeably be equated to a million lit. the root of money
cash at hand; cash sale, no credit
?
chained seeds that produce some rattling sound, used in tying around the ankle of a masquerade
to dance rhythmically, while on igbiri, to the tune of the drum especially kiriowu; to clatter
sandflies in a swarming group; gnats also òménbū
to perform some cleansing ceremony on a person or place in order to expel evil spirits or malignant influences
dance men perform by shaking the legs in astride position usually during masquerade display
net for catching fish
abbreviated form of ìhèbě, an expression to indicate surprise, usually accompanied with the action of raising the shoulders
an expression made at a surprise when one shudders at an incident; also ìsìebě
yes!
ants in groups as in swarming period
usually goes with the descriptive prefix, éréménì thus éréméní- ìjìbàsò, it is the reactionary state a man is put into as a result of the woman's failure to keep the rules of sexual tidiness and cleanliness. For example, it used to be the custom that a woman hides away her menstruous materials from the man; cleans up the man after sexual intercourse; does not allow her urine to touch their bed; does not allow a man to pass under her inner cloth (underwear) spread outside; does not use her left palm to rub the man's face. It is believed that in violation to these rules, a man becomes indolent, stupefied, sheepish, feverish, and staggering in his movement. He is termed to be under the influence of éréméní-ìjìbàsò. His lazy irregular mood is called "sókì" and he is described as being jùlèjùlé that is, imbecile. Also, a man in the indecent habit of spying on women's nakedness at their latrine area, when caught, and this "juju" is invoked on him, suffers the same fate. He will have to undergo some cleansing before regaining energy to start normal life
head-pad, coil a snake makes when resting
huge, stalwart person eagle
hip, loin
padlock
47
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS ìjìrà n
íjírī n ìkè n íkéìn n íkélí a. ìkèrèrè n
íkí v ìkìa n ìkìabǒ n ìkìaòwú n íkíba n íkífíní n ìkìnà n
n íkìnjí n íkírí v
ìkìrí a. Íkíríkó p.n. íkíríkó n íkírímá v íkìríngà n íkô v ìkò a. íkólí n íkópō n
íkówárí n íkú n n íkù n
íkū a. íkú n íkúfóìn n. íkúlá a. íkùlélè n íkúmà adv ìkùnò n ìkùnó v íkúyē n íkúyé-púnúmà n.a. íkpā n ìkpìkìkpíkī n íkpó n íkpókí n.a.
íkpókpō n íkpòpú n ìkpū n
n
SF
English gloss
sensation as of a current of cold atmosphere, that surrounds one; fear; aura
mango
hunchback
bunch of plantain, banana, palm fruit etc.
deformed, lame
very common type of sardine, smaller in size than the kparakpara; it is nicknamed éré-sóngú
to use a log of wood to place at the hearth for making fire
friendship; being amicable; attachment
friend
friend of somebody; a friend
fraction; part
log of burning fire; short size of log to form fire basis
practising shrine of the cult of the traditional kiriowu secret society metaphorically used as secret pact between lovers; deity for secrecy silkfish (with dark colour and slippery skin)
to creep
blunt, having no feeling; insensitive
family in Okrika living in Bù`lọme Biri
large slit-gong
to endure especially physical pain (= bíeíkírímá)
harmattan period; dry season
to fold; fold
bent; not straight
chain; prison
swelling in between the leg and the lower part of the abdomen; swelling in the groins as a result of some injury on the leg (boil, crawcraw, abrasion)
tent
louse
jaw, cheeks
cocoyam (<Kal.) [cf. Okrika ku]
heavy
jaws; mandible
nickname for manila currency; lit. swollen jaws;
lazy; indolent
iron
heavily
root; stumbling stump which portends good or bad luck
to stop; to end a process
heavy thing; load
heavy laden; weighty
wilderness; open grassy area
owl (<Igbo) [=Okrika kpàngbùkùngbùkù]
towel; Kano cloth
hard; knot that is hard; protruding bone of the body e.g. hibhone or ilium (kònjù-ìkpòkì), ischium (tùmò-ìkpòkì)
small size of the fish bálá
cockle fish (shell); bivalve
thick small bush full of tendrils, hanging twigs and grass over a stream family shrine decorated with young palm fronds and ódǔmdùm and
f
fm mi
f f
48
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
n
Ìkpúkùlùbíe p.n.
íkpùrúchù n íkpùrúkpà n ìkpúrùkpú n ìkpùrùmà n
Ìlè p.n. ìlè n ílòló n
ílópō n ímbí n ímbíba a.n ìmbìkámbìká adv ìmbìmbìlé v ìmbìré n ìmbò n ìmbògrígrí a.adv
ímbú n n ímbúbò n ímbùkú n
ìmbùrùkánákáná n.a.
ímgbè n n ímgbé n m@gbélé n
ímgbépèí n ímgbí n ìmgbì n
ìmgbílà p.n. ímgbírí n ímgbòlú n ímgbú n ímgbúlúmà v ímgbúlúmá-kìrì p.n.
ìmgbùsú n
ímgbùsú n ìmìkí v ìmìmá v
SF
English gloss
collections of empty wine bottles with animal skulls etc.
game usually played by two teams of males, each player holds a loop of "sụnụ" (cane string) to catch the tossed sheath-pad, made from the sheaths of maize. Any catch made by a player of one team draws a player to the opposing side; when a total score is made by several people's loops at a time, the score is described as ìgàbùrú
fishing port very close to Port Harcourt situated opposite Comprehensive Secondary School
cannon
food prepared from maize and plantain
maggot (cf. also íngúlé) (<Igbo)
swelling of the skin arising from scratch or sting by insects such as mosquito, tsetse fly, bees, wasp; weal
family in Okrika, living in Edereme Biri
shady tree wrapped with climbing stem, having broad leaves
bush fruit violet in colour whose pulp is sweet with a single round seed; a drupe
stomach carved out from a fish
coconut; kernel
description of palm fruit with soft nut also òsúkū (<Igbo)
in quick succession; one after the other
to roll; turning over and over
brother; my brother
human force engendered by the presence of great number
the presence of human force taking to motion e.g teaming up in functions, funerals, elections, religious gatherings, national call navel (bù`$lò-ìmbú)
bud of a flower, plant, sugar-cane
person, being (male or female) imbuapụ (pl.) also tomonibò shell-fish like "ikpopu" whose shell bivalves are light
threatening heavy storm with dark cloud anciently conceived of as surrounding the deity of thunder
oyster
od of Abulome
bone; strength
stone or stick used as club for fighting; also, mgbélé
fish resembling okue (horse mackerel), sweeter in taste
big fish of the ray group
small triangular bone forming the tail end of the spiral column or backbone known as coccyx; also pronounced m$gbì
ancient masquerade believed to be a mermaid
drum with high tone (= íngbírí)
smaller mud-fish in the swampy creeks
any round object like orange or lime used as ball for game; round ball to dress a fish by pressing its flesh to a retracted shape
borderline fishing port owned by Bolo, situated near Bodo water-side in BOLGA
part of owu decoration around the waist, where a projection is made at its back to carry segmented frills of cloth
fruit
to wriggle
to squeeze out water or oil from wet cloth or fibrous material
fm
f f
f f
ms mi f
49
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
ìmkpálà n ímō n ímó n ímpí n ìmpò n ìmpótō n ìndē v ìndé = ndé int.
ìndéndè$ excl.
índéná v.a. índó n
v índóméngí n
n
índókúmá a.v ìndú n ìndùbá n ìndùlùmá a. ínédá v.a. ínédábûọlóká a.n ínédámíẹkà a. ínéi num. ìnèmá v.n ínèrè n íngbír'r n ìngèí n íngéléngé n Íngémè Bìrì n íngíí v íngíríngírí a. íngórónī v
SF
English gloss
bronze anklets worn by girl during the "Ịrịa" ceremony sweat
hard wood
pangolin
fruit commonly found in the mangrove forest, eaten by monkeys plantain or banana stem
to wash the anus after defecating
meaning which? who? what? often used to stem other words to form compound words e.g. indebò (who or which person?); indeju (where?); indesiki (when? which time) etc.
expression used generally for greeting, meaning how is it; how do you do?
can; being able to (changed from ineda)
nipples or teat on the breast
to suck from the breast
milk from the breast
bush fruit from shrubs that tastes sweet
descriptive of a child to stop breast feeding or liquid feeding vulture also ọdẹlẹ
daughter; son's wife as called by his father or mother; my daughter crouching; being in uncomfortable position
can; capable to do; being able to
inclined to lust or waywardness; lasciviousness
unable to do; impossible
four in counting
endure, endurance; to bear up; to be patient; long suffering
banana
drum with high tone
one in counting
xylophone (also ébèrè)
quarter or ward in Okrika
to feed by begging from others
suffering in diverse forms
to lick off soup with fingers or ball of fufu
water-pot for music
larva of housefly, maggot, generally found in decaying matter and faeces
sugar-cane
they
to smell
their
themselves
deaf
friend, my friend
hair, fur
nails of the fingers and toes; claws of animals etc.
family in Ogoloma
all; they all; all of them
stubbornness
to be stubborn and obstinate
wire, metal string
crawcraw that appears in the private part of human beings; venereal
íngú íngúlē
íngùò ìnì
ìnī ìnìá ìnìabû íníkí ìnìkìó ínímé
Ìnímgbà ìnímgbà íníná ínínáchī`n ínjálā
ínjé
nmi n
n
pron.
v
a.
pron.
a.
n
n
n
p.n. fm pron
n
v
n
n
mi mi
50
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS ìnjì n
ìnjì-bùrú n ìnjìnì-òfòngō n ìnjìkòrí n
ínjìrì n ínjùnjú n ínkì n ìnyèngí n
ínyía n ìnyìá a. ínyíasó v ínyíasónyó n ìnùmá v.n ínúmā v.n ìnùmàfì v ìpérèré n ìpìangbá n ípín n.a. ìpò n ìpòpó n
íré n íréméníayè n
íréménítòkù n írétí v.n írétíbǒ n
ìrí n írí n írī v ìrìá v
iriaba n íríasó n
íríawó n ìrìsí n íróm n
ìrù n Irùènábè`$rè n ìrùkòró n írúo n
SF
f
English gloss
disease people take for syphilis
fish
shoal of very small fish that serves as food for big fishes. lit. fish food air-conditioning also letrik-ọfọngọ
whitish creature like pupa of an insect always found in the mouth of kaka fish
cloth otherwise known as real India; also called George (<Kal) yellowish dye for the skin
tattoo marks printed on the skin; liquid for writing and printing (<Eng.) lit. my mother, special term used by the wife of a son in addressing her husband's mother; she, the mother, in return addresses her son's wife ìndùbá
refuge
to be used to
to take refuge
place of refuge also íníasówáríbǒkò
cheat, fraud
conquer, defeat, overcome
forego; knowingly making room for defeat
fish generally taken as fresh water kigbo
maize, corn (also piamgba)
swollen scar, being left by a healed wound
mangrove forest fruit on which monkeys feed. It is also eaten by men smashed and beaten yam mixed with ripe plantain with oil in it; staple diet for the rich and well-off, it is regarded as special diet and therefore usually provided in ceremonial festivities such as family feast, clubs, religious gatherings, churching of women after child birth etc.
youth in women
youthful display of women, behaving in a manner likely to snub someone; a bluff, showy and swanky mood of women; fashion
young fashionable lady; coquette
act of being fashionable; practising the act of being fond of women
one who is fond of being in women's company; a woman who is fond of fashion
thread
blade; native blade
to miss the way; to go amiss
to exclaim a name of someone or oneself or any object or thing at a happening; to express surprise
rumours; what people hear and say, true or false
indirect and unexpected results of past events; results of guilty conscience; repercussions
gentle fashionable ladies
a storm; gale; tempest
top; a game in which the wooden reel, carved into a shape with pointed end, is spun on the ground, where is it flogged up with a sling to continue the spinning along the field of play. The materials used are the top, and the flinging sling tied to one-foot stick
wine, drink
chief and family in Ogu
palm-wine tree (raffia)
false statement; lie, untruth
51
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
írúoámíẹmíẹyè n írúokón v írúoséìbìdòkí n ìrùtórúbá a. ìrùtórúba- n bíebè`$lè
ìrùtórúsó a. ísé v ìsèbě excl.
ísé-ísé adv ísíbô pron ìsìbǒ n ìsìnè n ísíré n ísírébíe n ìsóìn n ísùlú n ìvìrí n íwô v ìyó n íyò n ìyòròkò n
Ị, ị
ìbà n
n n n
ìbàchín n ìbàdàká a. ìbàdù`$pàrí n ìbàfí v
ìbàfìbǒ n Ìbàká n Ìbàní n íbánì v Ìbàníchúká p.n. Ìbànìmè-Bìrì n ìbànìpéì n ìbàtòmgbólù n
ìbì n.a. íbíàm adv.e
xcl. ìbìamìèmìèyē n
ìbìamìèyèbárà ab.n ìbìbè`$rè n
SF
English gloss
falsehood
to tell a lie; to make a report, true or false
propaganda syns. tọrụgbẹịnma-írúokón; némímàírúokón drunk (<Kal.)
revelling
drunk, intoxicated
to spread
expression to indicate surprise (usually accompanied with the mannerism of raising the shoulders, that is shuddering also ihebè line by line
the other person
my friend; someone who knows one's secrets (ironically applied) loop with a running knot, as in a snare; a noose
holes in the water-cliffs in which fishes hide
inside of the holes of water-cliffs
cough
sweeping material made from the dry palm fruit bunch
heavy spread of crawcraw on the skin; scabies
to ascend
call word used by equals, male or female
common name for males, also ìyō
making light of something; something made common to everyone
some whitish matter appearing at the canthus of the eye especially as one rises from sleep, rime
soaked garri for food (<Y oruba)
forked stick
mote (biblical)
forked-stick for supporting and building
not difficult to perform. mostly used in the negative
cornerstone; important stone
to insinuate someone against another in order to curry favour; to betray or prove treacherous; to bribe
traitor
name of one of the towns on the island of Okrika
tribal or native name of the people of Bonny
to make a noise; to shout without control
king and a family in Okrika
ward or quarter in Ogoloma
larva found in logs of dead wood (it is edible)
ailment affecting the eyes eye-lids get swollen and white matter appearing at the canthus conjunctivitis (see ányámkpékē)
good, fine, beauty, beautiful, goodness, saint
momentously; at once; all of a sudden; trifle; etc. usually spoken as "gbórí íbíàm"
goodness; virtue; good manners, also
?
gospel; good story
fm
52
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS ìbìfùbàrà n
ìbìfùbàràp;ìrìyé n ìbìkárà n
ìbù`$gìẹ excl. ìbù`$kùrù n
íbǔlū n ìbù`$lùbù`$lú n íbǔpú n
Íbùrù p.n. íbúrù n íchìlá n íchítō n íchúkùrú n
íchúkùrù-òjú n ịdàm n
ídápó n ífálí n ífí n
ífífíópópólì n ìfúbā n
Ígá p.n. ìgà n ìgàbùrú n
ìgàchín n ìgàgáìgà a. ìgà-ìnìmé n ìgànì n ìgànìdòkí a. ígánímá v
SF
English gloss
fortune; good luck
mascot; something like bird, insect, animal, person, that brings good luck
perfect beauty
corrective expression cautioning a person when he errs in speech (in low accent, he says, "excuse me" or "pardon me" its equivalent; it is also pronounced on another who errs)
fishing-net hemmed round with cane to size, used in dragging under water; hand net
grey hair
smallest tilapia (àtàbàlà)
puffer fish; fish with thick skin and big head, having a set of teeth as a human being
family in Okrika
net for fishing weir
mudskipper, Periophthalmus papilio. cf. also èkèbìrì
perforated holes in wood, mostly found at the keel of canoe or boat small crab found in holes of dead wood in the mangrove, usually applied to describe someone with small size, thus ịchukụru-oju small-bodied person
infection that attacks the sole of the foot especially near the heel; it renders the sole inflated inwardly like hard boil; eczema
kola nut
horn (<Kalabari)
very small crab like íchúkùrú; smashed crab used as bait to trap mudskipper
hard boil on the skin which rarely produces pus, carbuncle
sweet cassava, commonly found in upper Ịjọ (Odi, Kaiama, Sabagreia etc.) which can be cooked or roasted and eaten like yam in one process; also known as the Panya type
family in Okrika living at Tomo Biri.
thorn
yam produced by the Ogoni people, full of strings on its body; term used in the game of "ìkpú" (see ìkpú).
thorny tree like the sìkákà (the cotton tree with digitate leaves). thorny, full of thorns
curly hair; dark strong and straight hair
wrath, indignation
irascible; easily provoked to anger; vexatious
to offend someone; to find palaver; to annoy someone Ìgìa
family in Okrika living in Ngeme Biri
game where the empty termite shell, carved into a shape, is used; it is twisted with the fingers to revolve in a dug out hollow to crack out a challenger
cataract on the eye
asserted power as a threat also èbèbà
waving of the waist during copulation
marriage (see Appendix)
wooden flat planks or boards used by a woman when weaning a baby in the fattening room. In the days before maternities had not operated, nursing mothers, used these boards so that they could have easy access to the cinder which is always within reach, to warm the waist
ìgìá
ìgìná ìgìnà ìgìpú ígúa ígúó
p.n. fm n
n v n n n
f f
fm f
c
c
fm
53
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
n ígúọfúrú n
ígbá n a.
ìgbà n
ígbáná n ìgbàná n ígbání v íjápū n íkákí n
n ìkàkí n íkàín n n
íkálí n ìkàrà n ìkàrà-òbírì n íkárí a. íkáríkáríkàrì a. ìkàrìnì-àwó n
a. ìkàsí n v ìk àsìyé n ìkàtà n íkélì n
íképú n
íkī a. ìkìán n ìkìankòró v ìkìankòròbó n ìkìàn-wàkí v ìkìká n íkíkàlí n
ìkìkò n íkólì n ìkòlì n íkóm n íkóní n.v
SF
English gloss
seats made of plank at the layout of buildings or waterside (Ówúsárà) for breezing, relaxing and gossiping
traditional ceremony whereby a husband steals a chance to have sexual relationship with his wife during her period of nursing a child. It is customary that a nursing wife does not have sex with the husband before the expiration of the first three months after childbirth, thus this action is termed "stealing"
strong wooden climbing stem used in making rope mostly for water- fence (chụa)
strong, magnificent as of building
period quite long past and nearly forgotten; time immemorial "ìgbà kùrà bìe
horn of animals
weal, ridge produced on the skin by the stroke of rod or whip
to demand; to claim
bitter cassava
tortoise
thick Akuete cloth
shell of shellfish
dandruff
dry solid ashes of mangrove wood at the hearth, generally used in producing liquid salt (chuòfun)
smallest finger
scabies, crawcraw
dog affected with scabies
rough, scaly, thorny
rough and scaly
swarms of soldier ants
quarrelsome wild children; ragamuffin
chair, seat
to lock a door or box etc.
something to serve as seat; anything used as seat-bench, stool, chair fish-trap in basket form
conical fish-trap; usually placed on the bed of sea or river to receive stray fish. It is later picked out after a number of days for the catch distributive shares in small sizes e.g. part of meat or flesh; 5 branches of political areas
selfish to a considerable point, miserly
omen; sign; lot
to prophesy; to foretell
prophet
to cast lot
biscuit
seedling of angala (mangrove); long and pointed seedling of angala plant
difficulty; awful experience, usually prefixed "si- thus sì-ìkìkò"
crab also ípà
branch, section
tree-bark used as flavour in cooking
constant crying and disturbance of a child
constant obstinate bluff of a wife
small short talking drum
n
n mi
c
54
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ
íkú ìkù
ìkpàbǒ íkpáìn íkpákí íkpàlíbè íkpálíkpà ìkpànáká
ìkpàngí ìkpàràkpàrà
íkpátā íkpéín
íkpíkpā íkpíkpī íkpíkìrī ìkpìrí Íkpúkú íkpúkú
íkpúlū ìkpùkùmà ìkpùkùmákpọ
Ìkpùrùbà ílá
Íláchíngì
ílákpō ílía
ìlò ìlògbō ílólí ílú
ílúg úlúgú ílúpíáín
ímá
PoS SF
v n n n n n n n
n
n
n
n f
n v.n
n
n
nf
n
p.n. fm n
n
n
n
v
v
p.n. n
n p.n.
n n
n v n n
n.a. excl.
n
English gloss
to be naughty as of children
rock in water; cataract
protruding forehead; (as in fúbárá-ìkù)
outgrowth on the head of a cock; cockscomb; the carbuncle of a cock my salvage (compound word)
squirrel
piece of baked mud, generally used as missile; stone
long iron pin used in picking yam, akara balls, etc. in cooking pot usually prefixed with "bùò" the ankles of the legs
water-fence (chụa) where a single arm is made springing from the main circular fence (<Ataba dialect)
size or measure of local gin (ákámèrè) in jar (<Igbo)
branch; projection as horn
big bonga (sardine), the size of sardine next before "kigbo" (bonga fish)
flag
to instigate someone to act against another; to incite some action; to stir
ladder
bird like the snipe, much smaller in size
short and small mud-fish
crawcraw appearing on the body in good quantity
family in Okrika living in Ngeme Biri
knot on a tree or made with rope or cloth
joints of the limbs in human body
fist
knot on a cloth tied round the waist (special style of tying by men)
to adopt the style of tying "ịkpụkụma"
used as idiom to mean being prepared to face some eventuality (to guard one's loins-biblical)
market near Okrika owned by the people of Elelenwo in Ikwere
bead
intestine
historical hillock of relics reminiscent of the deeds of the ancestral parents of the island, now levelled down to accommodate the civic centre. During "agiji-owu" display in these days, it used to be a security land or refuge. He who mounts it during the chase is never touched
bile
broom bunched together from the midribs of coconut palm fronds, generally used by elders in warding off flies, rarely used in sweeping (obs.)
summons
to take action against someone legally; to sue someone
dirt; filth; rubbish
hidden fishing grove in a creek usually paraded by ịbùkụrụ fisher women
end; final stage of anything; the depth of something
colloq. slang coined, generally used to retort a questioner in order to prevent him from getting further; a rude expensive joke
soul of man; spirit believed or supposed to be possessed by every living being
55
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS ìmà n
ímábí n.v
ìmàchùá v.a. ìmàín n.v ìmàínfà v ímámá n.v ìmbábìrí n
ímbájí n
ímbásí n.v ìmbíbī a. ímbìlárì adv ìmbínā n ìmbínābárā n ìmbínāchị^n n ìmbínāfíngì n ìmbínāpótò n ímbíọkō n ìmbòríbórí a. ìmbùkú a.n ìmbùrá n ímbúrúmbúrù v ímgbá n ìmgbà n ìmgbèsē v ìmgbèsèchín n ímgbíkì v
v
ìmgbòkù adv v
n
n ímgbólú n n ìmgbòpùmà- n
méngì
ímgbùkú n ìmgbùlùbà n ìmpípī a. ímúkú a. ịmúnúmúnú n ìnchòm@
SF
English gloss
pus from sore
practice of consulting a priest or priestess of a special or agency whose god gives a divine communication report of the enquiry; its priest or priestess is the ímábíbǒ oracle
septic, producing pus as of sore
two in counting; to vanish
to vanish away; to disappear totally; to perish
thanks; thank you
swallowing a ball of fufu without soup, that is, after chewing a piece of fish or meat with saliva to help the swallowing
beads, flat in shape and generally black or red in colour, worn around the waist by the female folk; a cultural attire
mischief making; a purposeful action to annoy someone
very small in size, appearance, and age; immature
umbrella (<English)
plantain
finger of the plantain crop
bunch of plantain crop
stalk of plantain or banana after the fingers are removed
herbaceous stem of plantain or banana
swelling on the wrist; carbuncle
smooth and glossy as of clean skin
joyous temperament of the mind; excessive inward happiness
sister, my sister
to moan; making inarticulate sound as if suffering physically; murmur wrestling
phlegm from the nose after sneezing
to lie across; to stop someone's progress
cross; cross-bar
to murder by strangling
to seize some property or money kept in care of someone who in order to claim refuses to give it out to the owner
would have
belated correct action following the mistaken action
regrettable end
deep meaningful expression only understood by indigenes
seed of any fruit
heart
neap tide; period when the sea attains the lowest tide
drupe, yellow in colour, whose plant has a hard bark fist made or fixed with the fingers and wrist
very small; infinitesimal
selfish, miserly, stingy
young palm frond
slimy whitish wormlike creature commonly found in decaying perforated mangrove logs known as ototoloba (it is edible)
being in melancholy; placing palm under chick
playword used by children to snatch food from one another. a bond is struck by the children ever before the practice is carried out. when some food-snacks, sugar cane, fruit, sweet etc. (not cooked food) is found in one's hand, he should shout "ịnga" to the other in order to
ìndùrú ìngá
nf
v excl.
56
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ
ìngàjì íngbónjí íngéríángálà íngéríbûnyánà ìngìlárì
ìngìlí
íngílímà íngílímáchú ìngìmá
ìngìrí ìngìsí ìngìsì íngó
ìngòrí
ìngụ& íngúlā ìnìá ìnìkìmá ínyā ínyādǒkí
ínyányá
ínyó
ínyóbā ínyóbûófóríbǒ ínyókpómá ínyókùròká
ínyómà ínyósárá ínyósáráéné ínō
ínúbǔrú
ípà
ípágbárà
ípòlí ípòlíbù`$rùmà ìpụ&n
írí ì r í  ìrìá ìrìà
ìrìabǒ ìrìamá
PoS
n n n n n n v v v
v adv adv n
n v n n n a.v n a.v
n
n
v
n
v n.a. a. adv v.n n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n pron p ron v
n
n v
SF
f f
English gloss
secure the food for himself. but if the other shouts it first, the holder of the food is compelled to share it with him; also, ngá
spoon
big fish, fair sized fish
notorious and pugnacious water mermaid independence, self rule or self government hagfish (Ogu dialect for ápún)
nickname for money
to screw or press forcefully
pressing in objectively; to cause to penetrate in
to take in breath and press hard with a frown e.g. as when a woman delivers or during defecating
to be grieved
not at all
since
wealth, riches, property, merchandise, mammon (biblical personification of riches as an evil spirit or deity)
to snore while sleeping
to talk in a muttering manner
frog
yam, commonly produced by the Elemes and Ogonis of OTELGA son; my son
patient; to be able endure
forceful
to secure oneself under a forceful submission to someone's refuge; seeking protection
leaf of a plant; pages of a book
strength, power, breath
to be patient; to hold on; to wait a bit
weakling; a weak person
to endure; to bear up; to try to hold one's strain
frail; frailty as of morals
weak, feeble as of physical appearance
just carefully; cautiously mindful
rest, leave, holiday
Sabbath day; Sunday, also Chọchị-ene
sore or ulcer
dry yam; seasoned yam
water crab
small red snapper, Lutjanus agennes (agbara), (also = kéín)
crayfish, shrimps, lobster
gunpowder
jigger, usually found on the foot of people
you (sing.)
I
to meet with someone
the transitional ceremony of girlhood to womanhood performed by every chaste girl of adolescent age; also the traditional three month fattening room or feeding custom undergone by a nursing mother after child birth
lady in the Ịrịa ceremony; ceremonial woman. pl. ìrìapụ
to meet for a purpose; to consult, to refer
c f c
57
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS ìrìamá-ríamá v.adv
ìrìaō v írímgbà prep
íróró n.a. írū a. írūa n írūākpóìn n írūāpákápákángâ n írūāpákápákányô n írūāsósónyò n írūātùmátùmányô írūātùmátùmángâ n írúọ v
írúọrúọ n Ìsàkà n
ísáká n ísámfúlò n
ìsàmgbá n ísám(ụ) n ísárám n ísían n ìsí'n a.v ísín v ìsòn n
ìsûn n ịsún n ísûn v ísúnchíẹmà v ísúnpákúmà v ítákítàkí n ìtàlí v.exc
l. ítítō n ítólì n ítólì n ítólì n ítólì n ítùmá n ìtù'n n íválà n íválí n ínwénénwéné n
íwó a. íwóbárákpóímbí ph.w
íwóbûọ n
SF
English gloss
meeting, consulting frequently for mutual discussions; referring to one another on points
to undergo the Ịrịa ceremony
"with you"; "upon all your presence"; an expression used in preceding a query levelled at a person
female (short form of iruorò) small, minute
sun, sunlight
hot season, sunshine
east east west
west
to spread something in the sun with the intention to have it dried; to place fish on the altar at the hearth for curing
female
town in Okrika division situated nearly opposite Port Harcourt by the marine wharf
tassels; hanging strands of any material
mamba, poisonous snake, slim and green in colour, that bites without being provoked;
minute tubers of cocoyam; rhizome that continues its growth periwinkle
tassels of maize
vein; rope from raffia palm
abraded; skin being peeled by injury
to weed grass on farmland or garden
small worms found in the flesh of fishes and meat especially gbulu (mullet and pork); also in the eye-lids of human beings
stretch; length
rabbit
to lay or put at a stretch
to stretch up standing as erecting a pillar or stick pinned
to stretch out as of hand
small catfish
to avoid or get off from an awful situation; proverbial language of the crayfish (ịpọlị) as it escapes from its catch ongoro
small perforated leakages on the keel of canoes also ịchịtọ
meshes of net
dimples at the cheeks or back of the waist
oyster
letters of the alphabet
black plastic material obtained from the swamp; tar also átùmá
dry mildew mostly found in very dry fish
sail attached to a canoe or boat or yacht
horns on the heads of animals
peppery fruit like alligator pepper
new, fresh
nickname for a menopausal woman who is fond of applying "make-up" (coined)
regeneration
s f
f
f
58
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
íwójáríjárí a. ịwọ ọbòkụ p.n. íwótómkírì n ìyàmìnàèbèdè n íyáyā n ìyò n ịyòrò n ịyòrò n
J, j
J,j
jàkàjàká a. Jámá p.n. Jámábò p.n. jáín a. jáníní a. járá n járí-járí a. járírímà adv.a
. jásìjásìmà adv
jéì excl. jékè adv jéné n
adv jénējénē adv
jènèrétò n jénjè adv.a
. jíī v jíā v
jìajíá a. jían a. jíanmábò n jíanmápù n.pl. jíanmápù n jíanpú n jíanyé n
jìé num. jìgìdá n
jíī v jíjí a. jíkē v jìké v jíí v jìkèjíké a. jín a. jínbǒ n jínbǒchúkùsìmèbô n
SF
c
fm fm
English gloss
very new and fresh; brand-new
New Testament
regeneration
special respectable headgear meant for a king; a crown rash on the skin
in favour of the tide
shrimps
long plumes for decorating masquerades
consonant, the fifteenth letter of the Okrika alphabet rough, disorderly; not in good condition
family in Okrika, living in Anyongugu Awolome Biri family in Ogoloma
bright, sparkling
shining brightly
gift added to a sale also chụaye (coined)
very new (a word usually prefixed with ịwọ, thus ịwọjarị-jarị very plain; very new and plain
marching or treading without care; intentionally treading to annoy someone
Oh! also jíéì
yet; awaiting a moment
another day; some other day
ever
never; never in the least; not at all
generator, motor to effect motion (<Eng. generator) no harm; things going well and normal
to off-load; to carry out from the lot lean to; to consult; to refer to staggering as being drunk
other
stranger
strangers (pl.)
Gentiles, non-Jews (Biblical) also Jiukapu
others
other things
fifteen in counting
beads worn on the waist by women (<Yor.) also ímbájí
to off-load
firm; strong; intact; full
to shake; inspire
to minimize; to sink into oblivion; to submerge and diminish = jìkéfā to off-load
shaky; unsteady
another
another person
subject; one under somebody
59
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
jínbǒdíkímámie v jínbǒnákùràkà a. jínē v jínè n jìnìá v.
n jìnìajínía a.
jínyé n jínyó n jìpú a.
júkú v jùkùjùkú a. júkúmà adv jùkùrù n jùlèjùlé a. jùlèpú a. jùọín = join n júó a.
K, k
K, k a kâ adv
SF
English gloss
to emulate; to imitate with a view to equalize or surpass being at variance with others; disagreeing
to draw of force
alcohol, hot drink <Eng. gin
to drag an issue; to dispute over something
a dispute or argument
doubting, fickle-minded; having double mind over some idea or something
another thing; what more; further more
another place
compressed (a term applied to one with short neck kòngó jìpú); plenty; surplus
to be at its full operation e.g. marketing play, fight or war etc.
feeling worried with perspiration; perspiring insensitively
really; in actual fact; actually
bedroom, chamber
lazy indolent, lacking keenness of mind
looking dull and clumsy (julepuma adv)
paddle or oar used in pulling canoe on the river or sea
(suffix) referring to follow or similar object, commonly used as suffix to pronouns e.g. ojuo tombò (his fellow man) etc.
consonant, the sixteenth letter of the Okrika alphabet not expressed interrogatively
large bird with large beak generally seen on sand-banks dry like skin not moistened with pomade
proving very officious, showy; expressing zeal truly or falsely
fable, proverb, parable
to talk idiomatically, to speak in a language not easily comprehensive; to tell a story for entertainment
byword also képēókúẹịn
lying carelessly and disorderly with face upwards
nickname for locally manufactured dry gin
to pluck or pick fruits; to set the fish, "ichila" on its small stick-pin (mengii) also china
to understand; to perceive the meaning of what is said or spoken
to tie cloth, to wrap or fasten a cloth round the waist
to tie firmly as of a parcel
to implicate someone in trouble
to warn
to tune a drum by tightening the screws or side-sticks also kákī
to be numb; to be deprived of sensation; benumbed
to reproach with good intention
to advise secretly against some suspected eventuality; to prepare someone against a case or problem
to crucify; to hang someone with impunity
fish, the small type of ówólō
small; also used as prefix to names mostly in order to create the diminutive, e.g. Kalasika; kalajohn etc.
kaàbá kábía kabịrịkabịrị kàbò kàbòkón
kàbòkónyé kàfàlàmá káịkáị kàín
kàínbó kàká káká
kákálī
kàkàmā kàkí kákī
kákí kákó kálá
nb a.
a.
n
v
n adv n
v
v
v
v
v
v
v v.a. v
v
v nf pref.
60
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS kálángā n
Kálángā Bírì n kálásíkísímè a. kàlíkíngí n kámákámákàmà adv
kàmbúkà n kaàmkám-ámàju n kàmsō v kàm(ụ) n kàmdòkí a. kán v.a.
SF
English gloss
toilet, latrine, urinal. Place or closet for passing out bodily wastes or latrine (lit. small place)
word in Ogoloma
temporal
standing with one leg and hopping (a game)
rushing through without cognisance of any object, refusing to be disturbed or halted
appearance in flowing clumsy dress; over coat
dreamland; (kaàmkám-ámájú)bè`$rè = fairy tale
to quarrel
quarrel, dispute
quarrelsome
to tear, disperse, break down; torn
basket
to hawk article about
to crack kernel; to wish or desire for something or somebody
to go round; (cf. also kànábǒró)
dark; darkness
bending corner; environs, roundabout
to break open; to open wide
scattered, asunder
to shatter; to tear into pieces
straw hat
skin rendered dry and scaly esp. during harmattan
temporary white marks on the skin caused by salt water
to tear with care as of breaking or tearing or carving a piece of meat or fish
being in pieces; ragged
to tear and eat; to kill a prey; to pounce on a junior person bullying rushing in a fury
torn into pieces asunder
to gush out, to come out in crowd as of dismissing or dispersing from a service or workshop
rushing and moving here and there as being disturbed by some incident; anxious for some sudden happening; stampede
flash forth as of light; tear, break or burst into pieces
to cancel; to break off
firmly, securely, steadily
to carve; to backbite and gossip about someone
complete in number or quantity
to be enough to satisfy a demand
incomplete, not correct
instead; rather
true; real; upright; straight
rough, thorny not smooth and regular
to prepare
righteousness, uprightness
perfect; all correct; having all essential elements, characteristic etc. bottle container for wine, oil or any liquid; also ólóló
to complete; to make up
long whitish beads used by ìrìapụ
deity ascribed to the people of Bolo
kànà
káná
kàná kánákáná kànàmànyô kánfínjì kángálágálà kángálágálámà kàngàrá
kángī kángó kánī
kàníkàní kánípéì kánkánkàn kánkósī kānpákábá
kánpírípírí
kànsàrá kánsīn kápúmà kárá
kárà
kàrā
kárákà kàràkà kàràkárá kàrákàrá kárákárámà kàràkáráyé káràgbásí kárámá kárámà káráménílá kárámíní
nbs v
v
v
a.n n v a. v n a. n v
a.
v adv v.a. v
id.
v.a. v adv v
a.
v
a. adv a. a. v
n a. n v n n
61
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
káráyé n kàrí v kàrìbìyè n
kárífī v kàrìfíyé n kásá n kásáchúa v kàsú n kàtàkpósì n.a.
kê adv kèbè`$kèbè`$má adv
kéín n kéī n
kèín v kéìn n
kéíín v
kéínkéín id. kèìnmâ adv kélē excl. kélédīkī adv kèlèlèlé a. kélékēlē adv kélékélē v. a. kélémā v kèlèmànyô n kélī v kémé n
n kèmèkèmē a.
kéngé = kéngé adv kéngē n kéngē v kéngē v kèngèrē a.
kéngī v kénī v képē v
kéréi-kéréi-kéréi excl. kéréní v
n
SF
English gloss
idols, carved things
to pray, to invoke discreetly or prayerful
fulfilment promise; something used to fulfil a promise e.g. Isaac used as such to God
to swear
oath sworn to
racket for fish
to set fish on racket for the purpose of drying and preservation
cashew (<Eng.)
gigantic in appearance; stalwart and masculine, virile person; giant-like (ke. adv) not expressed assertively
not, expressed assertively
moving dwarfishly as if under the weight of some heavy load; swaggering and watching left and right
small red snapper, Lutjanus agennes (agbara), nicknamed kẹịnba, denoting beauty
style of hairdo traditionally adopted by girls and adolescents; fashioning of hair to several designs by shaving parts of the hair on the head
to harvest yam that is, making the first harvest and leaving the balance for the final harvesting bùrù-kèín
bunch (of plantain or banana)
to print, design artistic work or decoration on a paper or walls; also, kéìn
sounding in thrilling treble tone, melodious tone
carefully or watching closely
introductory expression of entreaty or appeal; please
afterwards; sometime later; a little moment after
round, circular
bit by bit; little by little
surrounded, encircled
surround, encompass
roundabout; circular road junction
to go; to move away
mourning ceremony performed by a customarily lawfully married woman or man
people, person (obs.) (<Ịjọ)
tired; weak as a result of exertion or over-exercise of fatigue. (also = kọrịkọrị (<Kal.) ànyìmànyímá
only, alone
score in the game of draught or chess
to hatch (hen)
to carve or shape a marble from the shell of "nángúlò (igia)
to kindle; the burning log of wood cracking out into pieces of cinder also érérékàn
to trade by barter
to carve or slice meat, fish, bread
to resemble; to be according to one's name; when one acts according to one's name
proclamation to call people's attention for information
to greet
greeting
f
62
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
kèrènìá n v kérénídín v kèrèkèrìgbítípú n
késí a. késíkáláyè n késímà adv kèwè n kèwèkèwèmá adv kíarā n kìèn v kìẹnbìpī` a.
n kìẹnbûsóká a.
kìẹngbólómá v n kìẹnmā v
a. kìẹnmángá n v kiè`npakụma v kìènpélé v kígbó n kìkì n
kíkí a. kìkí v n
kíká a. kìkìa a. kìkìchùà v kìkìchùa-élékímà n kìkìchùabǒ n kìkìchùapírì v kìkìmā a. kìkìnā a. kìkìnà-kíkíná a. kìkìnà-kíkíná- n ókúẹíngbólù
kìkìyà n
kìlā v kìlànùngú n kìlárì n kìlè n kílómkílóm a. kílómkílómmà adv kílóló a.
adv kīn a.
v kìnbò n kìndá v
SF
English gloss
to be in greeting terms
to plan with someone; to consult, also bìá
to know how to greet
firefly; night insect that light
little, small
very small thing; narrow or least chance
in small amount or quantity; shortly; briefly
animal sp.
clumsily, moving in a crouching manner
bird, kingfisher
to count
under record; to be reckoned with
account
condemned, not reckoned with, worthless
to add up; add together
addition
to be cautious; to gauge; to imagine
thrifty; economical
economic living; economics
to live thriftily, thrift
to calculate; to account
to counter balance; to deduct after calculation bonga shad, Ethmalose fimbriata (also = òkílò) demarcation, boundary border
tight, firm
to stop or prevent
prevention; disturbance
resembling (<Kalabarị)
resembling, similar, identical also kìkìná
to create impediment; to prevent
mark showing boundary; border; demarcation mark hinderer; supplanter
to taboo; to place under a general prohibition; ban hidden, concealed
similar; alike; resembling
comparatively resembling; similar
synonyms. insert under 142
name of mermaid, supposed to dwell around Ogu area, its offspring are Otofa and Aleleya
to track someone; to chase; to look for with secret caution
eel
coral beads
majority of people
clumsy; awkward in movement clumsily
dripping of liquid, water, oil, etc.
fairly dry; when material still contains moisture and damp
to tap "tombo" or palmwine; to wink one's eyes; squeeze out
tapper of palm wine or tombo; idiomatically a workman
to tie an underpad at the private part of one's groins, a style adopted by
f
f
63
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS kíndā n
kíngí n kíngī v
kìngóm n kínī v kíní n kíní-nyánábó n kìnjìkó n kíónkíónmà adv kíónmíní a.
kípú a.
SF
English gloss
women especially when menstruating; to tie a towel around the waist and in between the thighs, clasping the frontal organs
style of wrestling where one hooks his leg with the opponent's and lifts it with a forceful twist of the body and throws him down
knife
to trade by barter; giving or exchanging an article for another article (see kéngī)
light pepper soup especially that prepared fresh fish (Ogu dialect)
to cut or butcher meat and fish
person (<Kal.)
(lit.) owner of person; the lord
big snake, dark grey in colour, also Ógídíkpó
looking very sharply and keenly into the eyes of another
small, narrow and longish (usually applied as abusive term to an ugly face: also fiòn
tight and undersize as of dress; also physical misfit as a result of deformity e.g. short hand or leg as a result of accident or sickness group, position or situation, or reason; earth
different
family in Okrika
to cut or barb
soup prepared without being boiled or cooked on fire, e.g. into a warm water put in roasted fish, pepper, salt and stir with finger or spoon expression of joy usually uttered when an incident or happiness offers itself
original and native name of Okrika (Okrika is the anglicised and adapted form). History: Oputibeya, the founder on meeting Opuogoloya, the founder of Ogoloma, discovered that they both spoke the same language. Thus Oputibeya averred spontaneously "Wa kịrịkẹ" meaning, we are not different; no difference
immediately; at once
respectively; orderly
fine, small close together as of meshes in a net
varied, diversified
what remains; what more; remainder
crisp; hard but breakable
blunt; having an obtuse thick round tip like nailless toe or finger chariot
taking place; reigning; being staged
heir; a successor
menstruate
special set of traditional masquerades owned individually and played once a while. The are licensed to talk in a special mode; they check immorality, bad behaviour, and quarrels omens among women; they are regarded as cultural, sacred and secret
well measured; sharply cut; clean cut
to humiliate; to reduce someone's respect etc.
being cut off automatically, putting a sudden limit or end to something
native stew, cooked dry with fresh pepper and fish full to capacity
kírī n kìrí a. Kìrí p.n. kírī v
kírífúlō kìrìgídì Kìrìkè
kíríkìrì kíríkīrī kíríkírí kìrìkírí kíríkónyé kìrìmkírím kìrìmbù kírínwéngí- ómúarù kíríōkī kíríōkī(bìa)bǒ kíríōrī Kíríọwū
kírīpélé kírípīrī kírípù
kítíkítí
fm n fo
excl. p.n.
adv. adv. a. a.
n a. a. n
v
n n.v p.n.
a.v v.n adv.a .
n a.
64
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
kóbírì v kòbìrìá v n kóbírìkó n
kòbìrìmá v.n kòbìrìmàwàrí n kóbò n kòfòkòfòmá adv
kóínkóín a. Kókō p.n. kókō v kókó adv kókōbárá n kòkòró v kókóyé n kòkú n kòlíkòlí(yé) slang
kòló excl. kólókólō v kòlòpìkólópí a.
kómbí a. kómbō v kòn v.n kònchùá v kóndó a. kònfíyé n kóngò n kóngó n kòngó n kóngóbíe n
kòngòkùròmá v.a. kònnì n kònìbǒ n kònịdè`$rìká ph.w
kònìjú p,n,
kònìmèngí n kònjú n kónjú n kònjùkóró v.n kònjùkòròmàyé n
SF
English gloss
to gather
to hold a meeting
gathering
turkey; also tòlótòló
to congregate; to assemble
synagogue
Nigerian money
moving in emptiness; appearing grand superficially but of no substance physically and materially, like a braggart
well dried to a point of being crisp
family in Ogoloma
to keep safely; to breed and bring up
so
safely, how cared for
to avoid; to dodge
truth; really; also kókómáyé
back of the human body; back of anything
expression used mostly by children to tickle someone to a liking of something which he may not have
expression to ascribe sympathy to someone who coughs especially hiccoughs
to collect; to gather in bits; to bring together from various points or pieces; to collect and carry
climbing and jumping in a clumsy manner like old or weak arboreal animals; irregular in movement; looking rickety
undersize; close fitting; smallish [Ogoloma dialect] also kparụ
to scorn; to mock
to decide or judge cases; to remain; fishing
to make a fish trap or weir
left-handed
occupation; business
singing club in Bolo; a measure for the sale of distilled gin
sword also ókólá-gìjì
neck
place where women defecate or disguise themselves freely for bathing or passing faeces (usually) at the mangrove watersides of Ọdù`m-dapa and Anyangu-Bori
stiff-necked; perversely obstinate
fishers; fishermen
fisherman; business partner also árúbò
expression denoting goods or articles of special choice, kept or set aside on reserve, as when the fisherman returns from his catch, he removes special fish from the lot, not to be sold, but to be used by the household; a trader keeps off article of his choice for himself; anything kept on reserve
lit. (place for fishermen) name arbitrarily given to a section of the main town of Ok town of Okrika
fishing season or period (usually falling within a fortnight)
waist, hip, loins
last born of any creature; the least of any species
period of immoderate excitement during sexual act; period of orgasm semen; the impregnating fluid from the man; sperm
fm
65
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ kònjúkùrō
kónkó
kònmà kònmàkónmá
kònbélé kònkyé kópú kópù kòrí kórí kòrìfìnì kòrìkòrí
kòrìpákábó
kóró kórō
kóró
kóró
kóróchíẹ
Kóróní Biri kórórō
Kóróní-Ógónò kòròmā
kòròmàdíkì kórū
kòrí kósímā
kótì
kótì
kótó
kótó krìmkrím kù
kúa k;úaí
k';ak';kí
PoS SF
a.
n fg
v a.
v n a. n v v n id.
v
n v
v v
v v
p.n. v
p.n. n
a.
v
v a.v v
n
n
n
a. id.
n excl.
excl.
a.
English gloss
situation one is described as having bad luck, to have none born after him or her
any empty container, generally used in making traps to catch red crabs on land
remain; to keep aside; to lay by
indefinite; not proper; half and half; in parts or fraction; lacking certainty
to judge; to make decision
remnant; what remains
spring tide. kọpụrụkụrụkụ kọpụjịjị, kọpụgbịmgbịm, etc.
container used for drinking or measure (<Eng. cup)
to burn; to work on farm land
to seize; to snatch; to take by force
burning fire; flame of fire
weakened as a result of tiredness; exertion or strain (<Kal.) also kèmèkèmé
burn forth; idiomatically used as showing forth good examples or results as of one's character or labour
palm tree
to grate food material like nutmeg, cocoyam, cassava, etc.; with knife or grater
scratch
to move about carelessly and aimlessly; to spread information with bad motive (usually goes with the word ámá thus ámákóró)
to go down from a height like rain from the clouds, kill, ladder bed etc.; to prostrate
to land as an explorer or navigator or sailor to settle on a new land; also to land from a height like plane or train
ward in Ogoloma
to scrape roughly as of removing old coating of paint on walls or canoe, etc.
name of an area in Okrika equated to a ward (biri)
thought; common sense, imagination, consideration
resembling
to consider; to imagine or conjecture
to wait; to wait for
smashed in pieces
to smash into pieces; to crush
court (<Eng.)
coat (<Eng.)
pouch; container for snuff kòtòkòtó
falling in bits or droplets as of rain lessening
crisp
cocoyam
expression of incomplete statement which stands for "what of?" John bè kụa? What of John? Árị kúa? What about her? Yé má kúa? What of the things?
expression to describe the failure of release of bullet from a gun as the trigger is pressed
interpretation of two forces jamming or two people unexpectedly meeting themselves or agreeing opinions or ideas
two things matching from all angles as of dress or style of fashion
66
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
kúaní excl. kúatìrì n kúayà n kùbā v kúbìe n kúbíechíẹchíẹ n kúbíechíẹchíẹchìẹ a.n kúbíechúa v kúbíedèín n kúbíefúkā n kúbíekúrómá v
kúbíelàká a. kúbíelókólókó a.n kúbíelókómá v kúbíemàínmàín a. kúbíem$gbòlù n
kúbíemíẹlókómà v kúbíesébûgbánág n béịn
kúbíeségbáná a.n kúbíesì n kúbíesìyètōn v.n kúbíetáíntáịn a.v kúbǔ n kùbû n
kúbǔdókú v n kúbǔsàmā v kúbǔtí v
kúéín a. kúéínmà adv kùẹìnkóró a. kùẹrìkuè`$rí a.
kùkò n kùkòìmbí n kúkú n kùkù a. kùkùkùmâ adv kùk'ùlū a.
SF
English gloss
what of interrogative expression always
case or key of gunpowder (ípòlíbù`$rùmà)
choir, choristers in a church pl. kúayàpù (<Eng. choir)
to fold one's arms
heart; mind; conscience; thinking; opinion
anxiety
anxious; desirous of quick results
to form an opinion or premeditate against someone
peace of mind
heart-pain or chest-pain; annoyance
to make up one's mind in facing some project bravely to strengthen; encourage; comfort; console
not serious; insincere
freewill; doing good out of one's volition
to discourage; dishearten
doubtful; double-minded; confused; fickle-minded
heart
to disappoint
faithfulness
trust; confidence; yearn
unhappiness
malice; evil intention
to lose heart; being beset; afraid
bay; open water space near a coast
front part of the human body; breast; chest; bosom
measure of cloth representing a fathom (usually measured by the spread of the two arms from fingertip to fingertip
to race by pulling canoes
regatta
to escape one's memory; to forget
to display at the bay by masquerading or any other form of display on water
clear; careful; keen
carefully; closely; watching keenly
sickly; relapsing with illness; a short time well, a short time down emaciating in appearance; looking sickly and reduced; wearing away in size
scrotum
testicles
pitcher; water pot
much; too much; too less
moving with fear as if struck with guilt of conscience; shivering
small, narrow as of mouth or any hole with spout e.g. kettle, baby's mouth, etc.
threadfin? fish like 'ofo' but much sweeter; spade fish
flat hat made with special fronds, used by women in their fishing and marketing; straw hat
human skull
behaving miserly and secretly; unnecessarily shy
slime, juicy substance
slimy, juicy
kùkùrá kúkúráchú
kùkùró kùkùrùkúkúrú kùlàlá
kùlàlí
nf n
n a. n a.
67
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS kùlèkùlé a.
kùlò n kùlòbò^ n kùlọdā v kùlò-òk';m v
kúlúkúlú n kúlúkúlú- n kpáịnkpáịn
kúlúmà n kùmbù n kúm n
kùn n kìín v kùnbá v kúnbā v kúnbā v kúnbā a. kùnbàrá n kùnbúlúmà adv kùnbûpòkó a. kúngú n kùngúrù n kúngúrū v kùnó n
kùnô v kúnó n
kùnòká a. kùnpéì v kùnpéìyé n kúnū a. kùnùnú a. kúọ n
kúrá n kùrā a. kúrā v kùrò a.n kùròádákā n kùròbárā n kùròbásō n kùròbò$ n kùròchíé v.a. kùròchíẹbělémà n kùròfénì n
SF
English gloss
ugly appearance of a child with spittle and phlegm dripping down the nostrils
bow of a canoe
person who pulls from the bow of a boat; the leader of an enterprise to lead; to be at the forefront
to be on one's own in business; to undertake an enterprise; to be independent
ebb tide when well drained
ebb tide at its dry lowest stage when the bed of the river is exposed
end; last; uttermost
native or locally made axe
expression made with mouth shut denoting aspersion cast on someone [onomatopoeic]; deriding unvoiced word
respect; honour or esteem
to catch; to arrest
to oppress a subject lit., catch and kill;
to bend or tilt;
to cheat, swindle
bent, not straight, deformed
under arrest; in custody; captivity
crouchingly; in a retracting position; making oneself smaller discharged; acquitted
larva of the flea usually found in rats and children who sleep on floors head of yam seeding (buru-kunguru)
to bite off in bits, e.g. fish, meat, bread, etc.
root
end, stopping points, 160,000 in figure i.e. twenty 'poku'
to stop or end a practice kụnẹ (Ogu dialect)
bow adorned with rattling seeds, generally used by priests to signal human presence in the bad bush and to exorcize evil spirits on arrival at the spirit forest
continuous; perpetual, non-stop
to prey on; to cheat
prey
sweet smelling fragrant
empty; totally finished
canopy built of 'ibila' material in a canoe having only the ridge supporter (also = m$bòtò)
year
agreeable, accommodation
to keep safely
strong; hard; power; permission; commission
pimples
violence; force
dark early morning hours of 4 a.m. 5 a.m.
strong man physically or mentally
to stand firmly; steadfast; to be sure
steadfast love; unflinching love
large powerful bird, capable of carrying little children away. Legend has it that in ancient Okrika when a kurofeni alights in the market square, the omen reports something to happen which would necessitate
68
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
kùròkírī n kùròkōn v kùròkúbíe n kùròkúró- n ámíemíeyè
kùrònìbǒ n kùròpìrì v kùròtétémā n kùròtórū n kùròyè n kúrú n
n kùrùá a.
kúrúkíarā n kúrúkúrú a.
SF
English gloss
consultation of the oracle, 'long juju' (igwe) at Arochuku. Rituals would then call for sacrificial ceremonies to appease the gods stronghold; good foundation
to perform a noble or fierce act; to murder
confidence
violence; forceful act; riotous act
mighty in battle; a murderer; a killer to permit; to grant power admonition
false bravery; cheating by force serious encounter; difficulty
small basket with cover used mostly in preserving dried fish these days. In ancient Okrika when boxes were not known, kụrụ was the main container of cloths and clothing kúrú
plant whose wood is used in producing canoe. It has red flowers agreeable; ready to compromise and consent to ideas of others
bird sp.
black
smallest type of horse mackerel
to mourn; to be grieved; sad; sorrowful
sprain; a violent wrenching or straining of the part of the body around joints without dislocation
small seedlings of cocoyam rhizome, which continues growing propagated cocoyam head
consonant, the seventeenth letter of the Okrika alphabet
to keep something safely and orderly; to guarantee the security of some property; to control
used in describing anything of narrow flat shape like oblong head, chin of a ship etc. (tíbí-kpā)
salvager; one who takes good care of some property or person
sea – urchin, abounding around sand banks. It has thorny scales and is inedible
lobster of the crustacean family found in holes of chicoco (ígú), with hard skin
neat; orderly and tidy
neatly, tidily, carefully
used as an expression demanding assurance of some doubtful idea or notion
to remove outer rusty coat of metal e.g. body of ship, corrugated iron sheet, enamel basin
"Never to happen" God forbid 'fònbílóbě kà' (Ogu dialect)
suddenly entering secretly e.g. swallowing automatically
very dry
parched land
dry and crisp
orang-utan; anthropoid apes commonly found in the East Indies; large long-armed monkey
kùrúkùrú kùrùrú kùsā
kúsàmgbā kútìbī`
KP,kp
KP,kp kpáa
kpā
kpábò# kpàfù
kpáịkpaī
kpáịn kpáịnmà
kpákpā
kpákpásìsì kpákárápù kpákíkí kápkíkí-kírí kpákírí-kpákírí kpàkó
nf v.a.
v.n
n n
v
a.
n nc
nc
a. adv
v
excl. adv a.
n
a. n
69
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
kpàkùmā a. kpálákpálà v kpálámkpálám a. kpálíkpálí a. kpálílí a. kpàmbìrí v.a.
kpángákpángá n kpángírī v
kpângbùkùngbùk n ù
kpánjú n kpánjú
SF
English gloss
concerning
to bother oneself for something of great need; running here and there tiny; thin (usually applied to tall lean fellow)
ebbed to the base as of tidal water
reduced to the bottom of a container e.g. oil, stew, soup, etc.
take off bits from a whole e.g. food like fish meat, cake etc. (also = kúngūrū
light measuring pan-basin used as dry measure for rice, beans, etc. to fry without water or oil dry frying, e.g. groundnut, garri, etc. (<Kalabari) Okrika is gbékénī (both used)
owl [cf. ìkpìkìkpíkī]
small shark and related cartilaginous fishes
last born living thing, esp. mammal
to explode automatically; burst with some crack or sound
pair of scissors or penknife
narrow; close up
to take away something unnoticed; pilfering
narrow road; lane or pathway
narrow and slim
to rub or clear with broom, hand, or duster
the sardine bigger than the large sardine but smaller than the 'kigbo' winking the eye at an unpleasant object or situation thus kpárá púmà tòmbò$ sẹịn that is, opening and closing one's eyes at someone in disdain or warding off
reducing and longish; dry and lean, affecting structure
clasping tightly
to cramp; to compress; to hold tightly from end to end
very dry; compressively reduced
to separate two fighters in order to maintain peace
to prevent a suspected happening or trouble or omen
to put together (usually applied to making of fire in order to increase the rate of burning) also, to reconcile parties
joined or put together getting two or three ends into one
short cut; quicker method
appearing satisfied with peace of mind; balanced feeling íkú kpèkèrē = flabby jaws as a result of good living flat
sitting or posing complacently
near; within reach
concerned with
to get near
mix; get mixed up; smear onto
to assemble in a place in large number; to be together in group
to collect little by little in order to save
clumsy, dangling, looking disgraceful
low and stunted
outer hard metal or paint peeling or breaking off
to kneel as for prayers
reduction or deformity caused by loss of flesh or bone e.g. when one's teeth are off, the jaw dimples or falls in
to appease; to divert for safety
to converse in a loose manner, having no definite objective; to gossip.
kpápólō v
kpápù n
kpópú a. kpápū v kpápúátélí n kpárám a. kpáránī v kpàràkpàrà nf kpárápúmà adv
kpárú a. kpátáịnmà adv kpátū v
a. kpéē v
kpéchī v
kpèchìá a.v kpékélé a. kpèkèrē a.
kpèkèrèmá adv kpékí a. kpèkìmā a. kpékímà v kpélékī v.a. kpèlú v kpélū v kpèlùkpèlù a. kpèndèpú a. kpèngbè v.a. kpèrèkí v kpèrìá a.
kpésîn v kpétē v
f
70
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS kpìlá v
kpím n kpíngò excl.
kpínhâ excl. kpìrìpùkpírípú a. kpírírìmà adv
SF
English gloss
struggle relentlessly for something in order to achieve it
to suffer in pains
tingle; some sensation in a person for some happening; a silent feeling an expression to interpret "yes" for "no" that is promising without fulfilling [coined] an irony
expression to spur a people or group: the author begins 'kpi' the group responds 'iha'
looking uneasy started and apprehensive as a result of some spontaneous purge
entering in with a push, forcefully and immediately
group; assembly; union; mob; crowd; summersault
congealed; changed from a soft-state to a hard one as of liquid
to roll into balls like fufu, to fold. also kpô as or kpóò
sound of very high waves (àkù) in the ocean when getting to splashing point
only, alone (also = kéngè ngérí)
aged; pertaining to living long
to tie, make a knot or fasten
to hang a person to death; to die by hanging
to form momentum; to gather into a group; to come together in good number or force
to commit suicide; to hang oneself
toy, not sizeable as for a measure
expression for oral tapping at someone's door; also for sound of gunshot
drop of liquid
dry and hard
dry and hard tableland like Bolo town and some of the villages on the mainland of Okrika
pouring in little drops
to wrap round
to exploit; to get into details; to take or bite off in bits
then; started then; then again; persistently repeating
huge, stalwart
to frequent someone with attacks and insults; to be fond of someone dropping something with some cracking sound in a careless way (echoic)
settled state of satisfaction or security; entering fully in e.g. sitting in a comfortable cosy chair; entering, completely into a house etc.
loose and dangling life a knot
exhausted as of the human body
applied in abusive terms to describe someone's forehead as flat and bare (with a change in the accent fúbárá kpókpó)
to dismantle any built up structure; to break down
lit, to chop off the outer material like coconut fibre; to carve
to discuss issues as in a symposium
to gather together; bringing together
to compile; to put together what is gathered
something gathered together, some things kept or put together thick clouds (also = kpòsàsóbǔnò)
to climb. To carve out rope from cane
v.n a.
v n
adv
a.
kpōfī` v kpóíkpóí a.
kpóín n kpóínkpóín a. kpóínkpóínkírí n
kpóínkpóínm$à adv
kpókélémà v kpókírī v kpòókóró adv kpòkòró a. kpókórō v kpókórórómà adv
kpòkòròpúmà adv kpókókpókó a.
kpòkpó a. kpókpō v
kpókpónī v
kpókpónímā v kpòkpònìmà- v gbólómà kpòkpònìmàyè n kpòkpònìsòbùnò n kpólī v
kpóō kpòó
kpóó
kpóị
kpóō
kpóò (kpọ^) v kpóbā v kpóchúà v
71
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
kpòlī a. kpólísábátélì n kpòlòkìkpólókí a.
kpòlìakà-kpólíaká a. kpómā v
kpómà adv kpòmàkpómá a. kpòmbī` v kpómbī v kpòmbíkpòmbī` a. kpòmbílī a. kpòmbìlō a.
kpómkèm adv kpóm(u) a. kpóngólómà adv kpònjísìmē v kpōpìn dàkí a. kpópū v kpòpùmà adv
kpóríkpórí a.
kpórókpóró n adv.
kpórónī v kpòrònìá v kpórónísín v kpórórō v kpóróró a. kpōsàsóbǔnò n kpōsàkánákánà n kpótéìn v kpótī v
kpótō v kpòtō v
kpótō v kpótó-ókí v kpòtòrō a.
kpòtòní a. kpòtònìsàrā a. kpúa excl.
kpúamà adv
kpúfú a. kpúfùkpúfù a.
SF
English gloss
emaciated
bridge
as of an awkward movement of an old man; descriptive of a clumsy gait adv. kpòlòkpólókímà
not level; uneven and irregular, as of land; rough and wavy
to set confusion and disagreement between two people or among groups: the performer of such act is known as íkpéínbǒ (a traitor) sorely; greatly
doubtful; controversial; contrary; disputatious etc.
to tie a fathom of cloth sideways
to pinch off
being in separate bits; scattered in bits or pieces, like unkempt hair thin, reduced in size; lean; wasting away in flesh. (Ogu dialect)
upward pointed growth like a hillock (usually attributed to shape of head)
in actual fact, really (<Igbo) (also = jụkụma)
heaped in convex shape like a hunch-back
left in solitude; alone like a widow or a marooned sailor
to sit down
slimily congealed
to hold up something in the mouth
in a situation when the access of air is prevented from flowing out; suffocating
bare like the bald of somebody's head; empty having nothing remaining
a rolling chair with wheels; a carriage
all at once (kpórókpórò)
to clear or rake together
to swerve; deviate suddenly
to clear or rake off totally
to drag with fishing material in the water e.g. using ibukuru or ongord finished, empty
thick clouds
deep darkness
to somersault
to deride a person; make a ridicule of someone; jesting; to rally; to banter
to repeat a course or action; to do a thing over again
to buy in large quantity; wholesale buying e.g. yams from a barn or goods from a factory
to disguise or strip off oneself; to overhaul for servicing
to restore; to bring back into use; position, etc.
spoilt by being filthily kept; wetted; dregs settling in congealed condition
reduced or disfigured deformed from original features
totally disfigured; completely shattered as of a broken vehicle interpretation of the explosive noise or sound of the oil bean and the like
careless placing of something; keeping or placing something anyhow without bothering where it is kept
impish; looking dwarfish
behaving with assertion; puffed up
72
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
kpùkúkpùkú n kpúkpúrà n
adv. kpùkúlū a. kpúlú a.
kpùlùkùkpúlúkú a. kpúlúmà adv
v kpụngbụrụ a. kpúrúkpúrú a.
kpúrúrù n kpúsù n. kpúsùkpúsù(ma) adv
kpùtùkpùtú a.n
kpútúu a.
kpùumá a. kpùwáì excl.
L,l
L,l
làá v láā v lábípí n lábárá-lábárá adv lábò#lábò# pron lágá n làká v.a. lálākā a. làlàmá v làlàmàyé n lámā v láókú-láókū id. làsìkìlásíkí id. láyé n láyéláyé pron
SF
English gloss
rhyme used in a game among girls to determine their future husbands sloping down descending
to move here and there struggling to search for something
shortish and plump
short
brief as of statement
undated ground; irregular piece of land; not level
briefly as when making a speech
to shorten
hale and vigilant; on the alert
healthy and strong agile; quite alive
hernia, an occasional rumbling of the testicles moving up to the groins kick
struggling and kicking one's legs at random like someone suffering from fainting-fit or convulsion
description of boiling point of stuffy soup on fire (echoic) adv. kpútúkpútúmà
looking dark, shabby and serious as if appearing in an oversized attire; heavy and fierce looking
moping, looking sheepish
abusive or cursing expression usually pronounced on someone who wrongs another when he encounters misfortune. He says, 'kpụ' waị' meaning ‘it serves you right’ or ‘you deserve it’ (see gụa)
consonant, the eighteenth letter of the Okrika alphabet to be enough
to visit; to reach
what it costs; cost price; value; price; worth
any how in a careless manner; at all events whoever; anybody; everybody etc.
needle
not enough
hopeless; unworthy
affect, due
entitlement; share due someone touch; taste
at all costs; whatever it may fetch; however it is whenever due; for ever and ever
cost or value. (also = lábípí)
anything
small fish like a big needle used by children in playing to know, to have an idea of
to agree to be lovers, love making
lover
to make out; to identify
to be denied of correct identify, to doubt somebody's identity open swamp having no mangrove forest on; parlour
sitting room; drawing room; parlour; open space for assembling plain; open; exposed; comprehensible
lékèlékè lékírì lèkìrìá lèkìrìabǒ lékíríbò$ lékírísímà lèlá lòlábíe lèlē
nf v
v.n
n
v v n n a.
73
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS lèlèmá adv
lèélèémà adv
lèmò n
lété a. létrìkì-òfòngò n létrìkì-tòngìé n líbō v lìgìlà a. lìkà n lílī v
lípū v lípú a. lóō v
lókō a. lòkòlókó a.
lókólókó a.
lókómà v lòkú n lòkú-mgbálú n lòliā n lólō v
lólói n
lòlō a. lólómā v lómìní n lùbù n lúgú n
lúkpèlúkpè a.
M,m
M,m
m excl. máà(mâ) pron mà aff.
màín num. màmà num. máan a. mànàmàmánámá a.
SF
English gloss
plainly
crying openly without shame but with full regret (usually suffixed owu)
anchor; means to control the steadiness of a boat; also used in securing a fishing line
bare; open; appearing miserably exposed
electric fan
electric light
to eat heavily
jealous (Ogoloma dialect)
religious clay ascribed to a group of churches
struggle; suffer; to fight hard for existence; to struggle in bringing up as for a motherless child
to pass out faeces in good quantity
plenty, full (also = bèin)
to hire for labour; to make presents to a wife in order to please her or to appease her for wrong done to her
very soft
flexible; soft
progressive, prosperous
free minded; light hearted; prepared to co-operate and accept suggestion; kindly disposed (usually prefixed with 'kúbíe')
to soften; to reduce the force
jaw
jawful, that is, taking in by measure of one's jaw
star
to prosper; improve; of a wife or child, to prove obstinate, not easily controlled
coined name for encased fufu, akpakuru, being wrapped in polythene bags and hawked
over-lapping and dangling adv. lòlòmá
to treat with love and admiration
lime
arrow; sheath for sword
special high seat for unseen ancestral parent placed in the shrine; also statue or monument
looking miserable and dejected; objectionable in appearance adv. lúkpèlú-kpèmà
consonant, the nineteenth letter of the Okrika alphabet
expression of acceptance; yes
these, those; also, "this" referring to this woman
(prefix, suffix,epithet) in varied uses 'ma' denotes these or those e.g., warị ma = the houses; matịtẹ = wait yet; ma yema = these things etc. two in counting, also ịmaịn
two; also ma
feeling dizzy to a point of swooning
sparkling and glistening with intermittent glow; diminishing as one looks on
74
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
mángá a. màngā a. màngí v màngìmā v màngìnàkóróná n màpùàwómè n másìsì n màtórúchúapù n m@bájí n m@básí n m@bí n m$bìré n ìmbòrìm@bórí a. m$bò n
ìmbòtò n m$bùrá n
mbúrúmbúrù v m$bùrùkánákáná n
mèkè n mémé a. mèmèé a. mémémà adv mèmbèré a. ménépúmà adv mèngí n méngí n
mèngìbèrèbò n mèngìbǔkó n méngí-ngó n
mèngìbìrìbésìn n mèngìbǒró a.
mèngìbùgìlásì n mèngìdérìpákábó n nyó
mènìmèní a. mèpú a. mèsí n m$gbà n
a. m@gbá n
m$gbáfò n m$gbàfún v m$gbàm@gbá n m@gbálú n.ad
SF
English gloss
squint eyed
double-sided; two ways of the happenings or things
to run
to respect with honour
unsteadiness; preoccupation; attention given to moving here and there twins (also = ngọziawọ <Igbo)
matches (<Eng.)
hypocrites
beads in form of plate-rings worn around the waist by women
mischief making
coconut; kernel
brother; my brother
smooth and glossy as of clean skin
human force engendered by the presence of great number of people; also ìmbò
canopy in a canoe built of íbílá, running from one side to the other side of the canoe
sister; my sister
to moan; making inarticulate sound as if from physical suffering threatening heavy storm with dark cloud; anciently conceived of as surrounding the deity of thunder
larger horse mackerel, Trachurus sp. (òkùé)
stealthy; secretly slow
tepid or lukewarm as of water
moving softly or stealthily
swelling to a bursting point, making the skin smooth and light
entering or sneaking in a manner unnoticed by anyone; hiding away water
carved stick-pins used in chaining up two or three 'ịchịla' (mudskippers)
seahorse, Hippocampus spp.
duck bill eagle ray
eckoning of ten méngí sticks, (also called bàlà or ákpárà), twenty 'ngo' that is groups of ten make one òtò
wash basin (water + <Eng.)
usually used on putrefied fish caused by long stay without being cured after the catch until a change of tide
drinking glass, tumbler (also = mèngìbùyé)
spring
sweet, sugary
depressed appearance of lips; light lips (bípí mèpú)
forty in counting
all
phlegm from the nose
wrestling
guava fruit
to blow out phlegm from the nostril
riddle (also = ègbèrìfíeyá)
jaw measure of food (usually prefixed with 'loku' thus 'lòkú-m@gbálú)
f
f f
75
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
v
mgbe n
m@gbélé n m@gbó a. m@gbō n m$gbóómà adv mî dem. míángà adv mìé v miì`@bákà n miè`@bàrà n miè`@běinmà v.n miè`@chíẹmà v miè`@déịnmà v miè`@dǒkí a. miè`@dûbámà v miè`@fámà v miè`@fíafíamà v miè`@fíafíamábò n
$
miè`@fófómà v miè`@gbéìn v miè`@gbéìnyè n miè`@gbòlòmà n.v miè`@íbímábò$ n miè`@íbímáyè n miè`@ídérímà v miè`@írímà n miè`@íwómà v miè`@íwómà v miè`@íwómábò$ n miè`@kámiè`@kà a. miè`@kámiè`@ká v bàràmiè`@ miè`@kámiè`@ká adv bàràbù`$ miè`@kámiè`@ká n bù`$
miè`@kámiè`@ká n bàrà
miè`@kánákánám v
à
miè`@kúrámà v miè`@kúrómà v
n miè`@kpúlúmà v miè`@lókómà v miè`@miè`@yà n miè`@miè`@yèbà n
ràòlòkò miè`@nángúómà v
SF
English gloss
(see imgbe)
club for stoning or throwing as weapon for fighting big, sizeable e.g., mgbọ inji
millipede
rarely, scarcely
this
here; this place or this way
do; perform; make
thanks; "thank you"
how done; solution; method applied
fulfil; fulfilment; replenish
to establish; (also = miè`@-pákúmà)
placate; to make peace
zealous; eager
to enrich; to make big; to enlarge
to accomplish; to conclude; settle; finish
to refine; cleanse; purity; sanctify; anoint
purifier
to create space or accommodation; to effect freedom of chance worth doing; be responsible for
thing worth doing
communion; common dealing with someone
benefactor
propitiation
to reduce; degrade; disappoint
mistake; error
to elevate; accelerate; to raise higher
to renew; to purge
a refiner; a renewer
bounden; willy-nilly; urgent; necessary; pressing to compel; to force; to drive to action
urgently; necessarily; compulsorily; etc. compulsion; necessity; urgency urgency; necessity; compulsion
to blindfold; to deceive; darken
to put things in order; to behave in an agreeable manner; to rectify to strengthen; to maintain; support; confirm
grace
to be brief; to summarise
to weaken; to disappoint habit; behaviour precepts
to prolong; to extend or lengthen
76
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
miè`@òkù n miè`@òkúmiè`@ó adv kú
miè`@òkùnèmì a. miè`@pábûmà v miè`@pákúmà v miè`@pérémà v miè`@sábámà v miè`@sè adv miè`@símà adv mìèsìyé n mìèsìyéófórí n.a. miè`@só-ókúmà adv miè`@súmà v mìésúngúmà v miè`@tékérémà v miè`@télímà v miè`@télímà v mìẹtíyé n,a. miè`@tókórómà v
miè`@yé n miè`@yébárásò n.a. miè`@yénémíkà n míjù adv míkìrìkìrì adv mílìkì n mímgbà n mímó n mín pron
mínā a. mìnà n
mìnàbǒ n mìnàbû n mìnàjúóbò$ n mínámínáká a. mìnàpú n mínè pron mìnì n mìní v mínímíní a. mìnìmìnìmâ adv mínyò n míókù adv míọmíọ a. mísìkì n móọ a. móịnmóịn n mònímòní a. mónō v
SF
English gloss
how or what to do; knowledge of; method however; in any case; Syn miè`@bàrámiè`@bárá
knowledgeable; comprehending
lit. to make bare; to impoverish; to reduce to nothingness
to establish; to make known; to launch (also = miechiema
to enrich someone; to cause one to be wealthy (also = álásómá
to overdo; to perform in excess
so that; grant that; let (also = yéè
to disgrace; to spoil
commitment
innocence
in order that; so that; to the extent that
to multiply; to increase; to swell
to continue doing; lengthen
to make right; to straighten; to correct
to repair; to make better; to refine
to induce; to influence
easy; simple; easy matter; joking matter; very easy
to disfigure; to cause something to change from its good form to bad form; to falsify; to spoil
cause; happening
prosperous; progress; prosperity; successful
ignorance; stupidity
here; this side or way
just now; immediately
milk (also = ndóméngí)
today
wooden frame of ịbùkụrụ
this; also used adv. when it stands for "so" "then" e.g. 'min a bo ye-ẹ' i.e.; "then I came"
our
relation
whose
relative
oneself
fellow person; neighbour
that much; all the quantity of
relatives
we; us
flesh
to swallow; to reach a required gauge
tiny, thin
secretly; not wishing to be exposed; whispering, as of speech
this place; here; also míọ (short form)
now; this moment
pointed and sharp like pin; needle, penknife
these days; nowadays
as of eyes looking morose and steady
baked or caked beans (<Yor.)
smooth
to sleep; to have sexual intercourse with
77
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS mónó n
mónóbǔrú n mónómángì n
móngí n
mónóyé n mótó n m@pàtáká n
m$pò n m$pótó n
múm(mu) v múkù n mùkùmùkùmà adv mùkùrùmúkúrú a. múmbǒ n mùmbú n múngú a. múnúmúnúmà adv músū a.
N,n
N,n
nà conj. nàa v náịn(mú) adv
nãmã n v nãmãbělékì n nãmãbûló n nãmãbûlóìkà n nãmãbûlóyè n nãmãchíẹmà v
nãmãfíán n nãmãkórómányó n nãmãóiú n
n námasíobìrì n
nàmbúlō n nàmbúlóbûlóàgbà n gbà
nàngá v nàngà n
SF
f f
f
English gloss
mackerel
very small fish, of the type of ekemba (smallest size of songu) used as food for most big fishes such as horse mackerel (okue), shiny nose (nda), etc. also called inji-bùru; seafood
bear; fond of sleeping
fish full of bones in its flesh. It has silvery scales whose flesh appears soft but when cooked becomes hard, (lady-fish)
bed; sleeping material
car, vehicle (<Eng. motor)
dried tapioca prepared from cassava
also m$pò fruit found at the fringe of mangrove forests, mostly eaten by
monkeys
plantain stem
to go, to move
idiot
muttering; talking in low tone to oneself
very secret and miserly in behaviour
thwart, sitting bench in a canoe or boat
mortar
waste from grief esp. in the eyes; change esp. in the eyes and of tide looking with eyes slightly open
getting putrefied e.g. fish, stale food, meat, etc.
consonant, the twentieth letter of the Okrika alphabet
and, plus, that
to hear
throwing oneself and falling unconsciously as in coma, falling as a result of fainting
mammal, animal; meat of any animal to build (house or anything)
fat, lard
stomach of animal
intestines of the stomach of animals
contents of the stomach of animals
to build up some structure
to increase or develop one's faith spiritually or morally faeces of animals; animal dung
zoo
animal skin námáójúàpùrà
hide of animal skinned
lit. bad god; a cursed person for evil or bad behaviour; bad to the point of resembling a bad dog
cow
lit. the whitish side of the cow's stomach, the dark cloud with silver lining indicating break of day; very early morning within the hours of 4-5 a.m.
to trample, tread; march;
method of fishing with 'ikata' where at flowing tide, it is placed
fg
78
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
nángánángá a. nàngàbá v nàngàbùò`$ n nàngì n nángúlò n nángúó a. nángbóomà adv Nchía p.n. ndà n
ndàyê? int. ndàìgbíkì? int. ndè bò? int. ndè jú? int. ndè síkí? int. ndéndè int.
Ndèlè p.n. ndókúmá(ká) a. Némbé n nèmbè n
nèmí n némí v némíkásè prep. nèmì-órû n némímàírúokón n námímàmīè adv
v nèngí a.
nèngìmà v n$gá excl.
ngàdá n ngàjí n ngàngà n ngàngàkpā v
a. ngèí n ngéléngé n
Ngémè Bìrì p.n. Ngeri p.n. ngérí a. ngéríbûnyáná n
SF
f
f
English gloss
sideways on a slightly trampled soil and secured with a line of stick pinned over it from side to side; fishes esp. mudskipper and silkfish rush in for the catch
distant; far off; high up
to trample to death; to smite; idiomatically, to cheat step; stampede
sting of fish or insect
shell fish in marble
tall or long
moping speechlessly; standing and looking agape like a sheep
town in OTELGA
shiny nose or thread fin.
elision like nde, whose preceding vowel "i" is dropped; it is often used as prefix to form compound wards with other stems in the interrogative mood e.g. ndapụ (how many people)?
how many things?
how much money?
who? which person?
where? which place?
when? which time?
how? how do you do? how is it? (greeting expressions among familiar people
town in KELGA of Rivers State
infant still sucking from the mother's breast (see indokumaka)
town in BALGA of Rivers State
fishing weir usually set at the side of mangrove bush, done by single hand
wisdom, cleverness; insight
to know; to have some idea of
if, whether
experience
propaganda
deliberately,
internationally
older, superior, senior to
prevail, overcome
exclamation declaring an agreed expression generally used by children in begging by force, if a child has some snacks in hand and another child pronounces 'nga' earlier, he the holder of the snacks, is bound to share it with him. But if he who has it forestalls the other to shout 'nga' he retains all of it also, ìngá
chair; seat
spoon
gay and flashy looking, most of the time (<Igbo)
being fond of showing off;
proud and flashy appearance
one (see ìngei) in counting
xylophone
quarter or ward in Okrika
family in Okrika, living in Anyungu-biri
alone; single
liberty, freedom, independence
fg
mi fm
79
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
ngérífí a. ngérípákábǒ n ngérítíbínyáná a. ńgịà n ńgìatòrú n ngìrí v ngíríngīrī a. ngìsí adv ngìsì adv ngō n ngó n ngófíyé n
ngókón v ngókónbǒ n ngókókówání n ngólī v ngòrí v
ngówarí n ngózí n ngù n ngú n ngúa excl. ngúengúe n nìnbìrèòwú n nímé n níméchú v níméwórí v nìnà n nìnàkpá n nínè num. nínī n (nìiní) v níníápángà n nínífūn v njálí n njálī-';abọ^^ n njé n
njī n njùnjú n nkúabà n nnèrè n nòm(ú) n
a. nóndó n nóndó-ámápù n
SF
c
English gloss
selfish, greedy
only born
independence, not subject to another; free autonomous; self-governing metaphor for force, difficulty etc. usually applied in figure of speech figurative expression meaning bold attempt or bold face
to be aggrieved; unhappy
suffering
not at all
since, all the time
smallest ákángá crab
wealth; property
benefit derived from the wealth of the dead; all relatives of the dead person (females), contribute freely towards this traditional fund which the major family (ọmụarụ) and the immediate family (furo) share in the ratio of 2.1.
to acquire wealth
rich man; wealthy man
storehouse
to remove congealed liquid like oil or pomade with the finger
to snore
to groan; to talk in a muttering manner
store or shop
term given to twins (<Igbo) Okrika is màpùàwó
frog
clay pot or pitcher used as pot drum for music production
term used to order a start for a journey or departure or speech making flower
brother of his or hers, also nùnbìrèòwú
song; abuse
to sing
to taunt; to abuse
urine
kidney; organ that excretes urine
eight in counting
nose
to commit murder secretly; to waylay and kill
the openings of the nostrils of the nose; nostrils
to blow the nose in order to remove phlegm
wire string
harp; string instrument. (also = díkí-óbó)
craw-craw (syphilis) appearing around the affected area of the body- the penis, vagina and ankles
fish (generic)
yellow dye made out of yellowish wood pulp
pineapple, (<Igbo) Okrika is Bekeni-nguò`$
banana fruit
madness,
lunatic
mangrove forest nearest to the habitable area; usually a water-free area legend has it that there is a place along the lower part of River Niger, where human beings that have tails, like monkeys, abound, these beings of this place bear short tails and live exclusively
f
80
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ
PoS SF
English gloss
catfish
to suck
family in Okrika abb. from Nonjuwaribòkọ, living in Adedeme-Biri special burial place located in the mangrove forest, where people who die with bodily complaints such as sores, leprosy, dropsy, madness, blindness, pregnancy, hunchback, cancer, childbirth, drowning, hydrocele, suicide, etc. are buried, it is also called opuama
large white sea-bird, like the okola
feeling uncomfortable as a result of some physical pressure, being sick and cannot move freely
feeling uncomfortable as a result of surrounding e.g. stuffy room, bad seat, stench, bored otherwise etc.
brother of his or hers
sister of his or hers, also, numburaro
huge, elegant, well beautified masquerade,
handsome stalwart
compound
gate of a compound
side glance;
looking askance at
screw-pine, the pandanus plant
to draw
to argue or drag issues
consonant, the twenty first letter of the Okrika alphabet duiker
smart and agile
glittering shinning, dazzling
small pot for quick preparation of food
frying noise of cooking as when onion is poured on to hot oil (onomatopoeic)
sounding like frying
smallish in appearance
light rain
to move; walk; journey
style of walking; gait; movement
step, footstep, planned movement; plan
transgression; going astray
people
until
till
poison; deadly thing
variance; at variance with people; disagreeable
all; all people; everybody
as, such, when
such people
such things
called; thought
if, whether
nf nónjú v
nòngú
Nónjú p.n.
nónjú-ámá n
ntórù n nùkùnùkú a.
nùkùnúkú a.
nùmbìrè-òwú n nùnbùràá n númbúrú n
núngó n núngóbǒkò n nùngù n
v nùnù n núnú v nùnùá v
NW, nw
NW, nw
nwá n nwànànwàná a. nwánánìnwánánì a. nwáín-kóró n nwáin excl.
nwáịnmà adv nwénénwéné a.
nwéngí v nwéngíbárá n nwéngíbûó n nwéngírímà n nwènì n nwéníi adv
prep. nwènìbàbàyé n
nwènìnàkùràkà a.n nwènímgbà n nwō prep. nwòàpù n nwòàpù n nwòchī`n v nwòfá adv
fm
81
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS nwòín(nwònyí) v
nwóngírī v Ny, ny
Ny, ny
nyàná v Nyànàbò$ n nyánábǒ n nyànàbákámà a. nyànàbè$rènìká a. nyànákábò^ pron.
nyàpìnyàpìmâ adv
nyàsùmā adv
nyányànyá a. nyèngényèngé a.
nyèngì n nyèngìbò$ n nyódíkí v nyódíkíbǒ n nyódíkídíkí v nyófíemá v nyófín v nyófínyé n nyófóín v nyóín adv
nyóísín v nyókán v nyókórú v nyókórúbǒ n nyómú v
nyón n nyòngó v
nyòngónyòngó a. nyòngòrò n nyónī a. nyótān v nyótélímá v nyótōn v
SF
English gloss
to clean by scrubbing off with knife as of roasted cocoyam, yam, plantain, etc.
to mix; to turn up and down; to manipulate
consonant, the twenty-second letter of the Okrika alphabet to own, have appropriate
Lord
owner; master
wealthy
to be rebellious; seditious
attributive expression pointing to oneself or another in enlisting sympathy for some happening; another expression meaning "poor me" or "poor you"
making queer sturdy movement that suggests fun; disorderly brisk movement
appearing with protruding stomach, and stout bodied; looking stupefied
rascally; unsteady in behaviour
hanging in a fanciful manner like flowers and leaves in a foliage; also like plumes hanging decoratively on a masquerade
placenta
mother
to inspect a place
inspector; health officer or sanitary inspector
to rule a place; to reign over a people
to make a noise to create commotion or disturbance
to sweep a place
sweeping material; broom
to snatch a chance
extinguished like fire; also breath, putting a stop to anything with life ending suddenly; quenching. (also = bìín)
to weed a place
to scatter a group to cause a breakdown or disorderliness
to keep watch
security man
to go fishing; to go in search of one's daily bread; being on a business trip
place; fishing or business trip
moving with a jerky behaviour; a gait with a slight flinging and waving of arms, neck and body
fancifully hanging
mother belonging to him or her; his or her mother
reduced in size
clearing some gathered refuse of a place
keeping a place in order; clean up somewhere
to survey or plan a place
82
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS O,o
O,o
ò pron. ó pron. òbó n
òbí n óbē n òbé n
òbèlè n óbíanà n òbìdò$kí a. òbìká a. òbìkóló n òbìóbìó excl.
SF
English gloss
vowel, the twenty-third letter of the Okrika alphabet he
you (pl.)
sickness
yaws, framboesia
yam-beetle, usually found in farms
native or local pear, usually, roasted or steamed and eaten with maize, also ùbé (Igbo)
longish calabash used for palm wine
deity belonging to the people of Ogbogbo
sickly; fond of being unwell
healthy; whole (also = Ójúkárà-gbásí)
nickname given to one fond of being sick
exclamation made during the hide and seek game, warning the partakers of the start
sea-gull
dog
bush fruit resembling the testicles of the dog, red in colour
satellite masquerade played with 'èbè'
catfish with a long flat head
wild bush pig
small shiny nose (nda)
den or meeting place of detractors; generally where they plan evil; a meeting place, more often used in a bad sense
cold
dull in action
large catfish
some sensory experience occupying or confronting someone; overwhelmed with fear; aura of fear
being overwhelmed with fear as a result of sudden sensation e.g. coming across a ghost etc.
lukewarm; tepid; not cold not hot
Obolo people
large mangrove bird (also = bùnàmbúlò)
to stick to like paint or gum
to embrace or clasp fully
goat
fool
deceive, deceit
to deceive someone to misdirect someone
sharp
sharpen (also = fárí)
mist; fog
to collect money; tax, etc.
tribute; things collected and paid; contribution
material scraped from the rind of mangrove root to be used in checking leaks in canoes
water fence (chụā) where the two arms spread out by a passage from the main circular body (<Ataba dialect)
roof of a house
óbìléngò n
òbìrì n òbìrìkùkó n òbìrìnángúlò p.n. óbō-ágà nf óbóìn n
ms óbóìn n. f
òbòkà n
óbókù n a.
óbókú nf óbókúìjìrà n
óbókúìjìràbǔsàrá ph.w
óbókùbípífà a. òbòló p.n. óbóló n òbólò v òbólò
óbórí n óbóríbǒ n óbóríchín n.v óbóríchíẹmá v óbù# a. óbǔmā v òbùtò n óchó v óchóayé n òchòín n
óchú n òchù n
83
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ ódélà(édélà)
Òdì òdó
ódó Òdòbírí òdòdó ódǔ ódúmbí Ódúm$
PoS SF
n
p.n. n
v
p.n.
n
n
n
p.n. fm
English gloss
vegetable concoction used to beautify the skin; mostly used by women when undergoing Ịrịa ceremony; a sort of make-up
town in YELGA of Rivers State
yellow colour
compound or yard or premises
to purl or knit; to weave
deity of wealth which Atorudibo worshipped and became priest of larva of moth and other insects usually found in corncobs
ivory husk; horn; native bugle
button
family in Okrika living in Amanọngọ Biri
lion (<Igbo) (cf. Okrika chírìbà-nàmá)
special plant or shrub with deep green leaves used in demarcating land boundaries; also used by diviners in their juju practice (Newboldia laevis)
confusionist; double dealer; one who acts differently from his promises by word of mouth
bush mango which has a strong smell; also eddy of a stream or river flat fish. Spade-fish
to investigate secretly
not available; absent
unreasonable; unimportant; wild; riotous; irresponsible
rat
to blow; to emit some current of air from the mouth
large dark-greyish venomous snake
snipe, a fishing bird commonly found on swamps shaking its tail as it moves
cartilage from fish
expression usually made to admire a dancer and stop him from continuing
in-law to the brothers and male relations of the husband; another word for 'ta', being wife to the male relations of the wife's husband
nicname for a tall person
deity of hunch, believed to disfigure the victim, usually symbolised with the white mangrove (ọkọ) owned by a family in Ogoloma
skylark
drumming tone of a type; a group or set of drums (Ogu dialect) (also = ákúachírí one of the towns in Kirikese
major fractional part of Okrika island
costly cloth mostly used by women
infection that affects the skin esp. the face; rendering it not clear or dusty
drains; natural gutter
torrent; drainage water rushing from gutter
town in Okrika division
age for a set of equals
equals of an age group
age-grade, equals
children of the same age
water masquerade popularly played by Ogu people. Also ógúoin
ward in Okrika
ward in Ogoloma
òdúm(u) n ódúmdùm n
òfìógìrì n
ófìón n òfò n ófó v ófórí v ófórífóríká a. òfùngùrù n ófúró v ógídíkpó n ógíogío n
ògìrì n ógírírí excl.
ógō n ógódó n
ògóínyó n ògòló n
ògòlò n Ògòlòmé n
ógóná n
ógóróró n ógóróró-méngì n Ògù n ógú n ógúábárá n ógú-ápú n ógúawọ n ógúeìn p.n. Ógúemè Bìrì p.n. Ògùlẹmẹ Bìrì p.n.
f
mi
ms
84
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS ògùmàbìrì n
ògùnú n
ògùrù n n.
ógúrúgúrú n ógbē n
Ògbìkìmé-Bìrì p.n. ògbò n ògbòchín n ógbòchúa v ògbòchùanwéngí v ògbòdá v Ògbògbò n ógbógbó n
ògbóìnjì n ógbókía n.v ògbòkīa v
ógbókíayé n ògbòkìanyō n ògbòkú n.a. ògbòkúkìènbìpì n ògbòkúsópáká v ògbólìló n ógbólódòmé n ògbò-nà-ángá-ná a. ógbólómá-ówú n
ògbórìgbó n ògbòtōn(ògbòtoò` v @n) ògbòtọ^n(ògbòtóò v n)
ógbùdù n ògbúlù n ójé(éjé) n ójìnéé n
òjòló(jò) n òjóngò n
òjòngòwú n ójū n
SF
English gloss
market
peacock, distinguished for its beautiful long feathers at the tails; legend has it that its feathers sing that is, probably when it clacks; a good singer is nicknamed ògùnú
fierce animal like the lion; severe sunshine
proverbially, a serious case
palm fronds
hammerkop, Scopus umbretta; heron-like bird, brown in colour. (also= égbē)
ward in Ogoloma
club; society
kingpost of a building; idiomatically, the head of a family
to band together
move together in a group or procession
to keep aloof (also = bûtón)
town in Okrika division
flat board usually placed in a canoe to carry the fishing materials nets basket etc.
large horse mackerel, Trachurus sp. (cf. òkùé)
fencing round; to make a fence; fenced place
to mobilise and fight against one person; many joining hands to attack one person (also = ògbòkìa-òwù(n)
fence made of block or brick or plants or sticks for defence
fenced yard or compound; a campus
centre or middle; central
average
to interpose, intervene, intercede; mediate
large bird sp.
the god of the mangrove forest
midway; neutral; considered both sides
fight involving more than two, i.e., retaliatory fight; each fighter defending his relation
name of an ancient masquerade
to plan or organise a company; to band together; to partake of; to keep company with
to keep off; be apart; keep away; be aloof (also = ògbòdáà)
style of cloth tying by the 'Ịrịa' participants like hoop skirt
coral beads
tree sp.
tug-of-war game: each team is made up of equal number of members who chain themselves by encircling each member's waist with his or her hands; the two team leaders hook their hands while the rest tug style of headgear adopted by women, where the tips and ends are extra- ordinarily widened and overlapping and occupying space (also = àkpángā [coined]
jug
dancing masquerades usually played by the people of Oba Polo, Ogoloma and Ibaka
human body; skin
game played in a heap of sand by two or more players: hide and seek? Players attempt to pick out a buried rope-ring with their respective
f
85
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ
ójúakpákpà ójúapúrà
ójúfị^
ójúfī`
ójúgbè
òjùjú ójúkáràgbásí òjùkàràmàyè ójúmínì ójúmìnàpùkòtáríà yè
ójúsì ójútòkòró ójúyâ ójúwòrō ókè (ékè) óképáìn òkī
ókí ókígùe òkílò ókíobòlò
ókíolòlò òkìrì òkìsánì òkò
ókó ókóbá
òkòchùkù Òkòchìrì
òkókō òkòkòrò
ókólá
ókólá
ókólá
òkòlō òkòlòkpàchí ókólóba
òkòmá ókóm(ú)
PoS
n n a. a. n n a. n n n
n a. a. n n v n v n n n
p.n. n
n
n
v
n
n. p.n.
n n
n
SF
English gloss
stick-pins; whoever picks out the ring, scores a point and takes his turn to bury it again for others to search out
physical body of mammal: mostly applied to dead body as waste body human skin
close fitting, tight body
paralysed; palsied
rich flannel cloth (feni) used for traditional wears
toy frightening children; posture of the mood of frightening whole (Biblical); hale and healthy; fit.
repetition; a second time
flesh of the body
lusts; carnal (Biblical)
emaciation of the body (also = ójúwòrō) maimed
being used to; agreeing with one's constitution emaciation of the body
demarcation, mark (<Igbo) Okrika is kìkì-èlèkímà
to jubilate and make merriment by shouting and howling also éképáìn sawfish, Pristis pristis
to swim
locally manufactured iron pot-stand (<Igbo)
bonga shad, Ethmalose fimbriata (also = kigbo)
powerful bird commemorated in the famous ancient Kiri-owu masquerade display-Okrika traditional secret society masquerades large bird, also a senior masquerade of the kiriowu
castrated he-goat
shark-liver
shrine representing a section of a family
to carve in or scoop out from a material such as stone or wood in order to make a hollow
cowry, a small shell used as currency by the ancestral fathers also cataract of the eye (<Kalabari)
?
later name of Okopiri, when the increased population befitted full habitation of settlers
nickname for the parrot (òkòlòbì)
dimple made on a ball of fufu meant contain some soup to aid swallowing; a hollow
large white bird commonly found around Bonny bar. It is believed that the name, Okoloba, is derived from 'Okolo-ama' this is a town or place where the bird okola abounds;
long sword 'ókólá-ágíjì', otherwise known as kóngó
swordfish, Xiphias gladias
creek that terminates at a point
corned-beef
native and local name of Bonny, a town and headquarters of OLGA of Rivers State
clay pot or baked mud pot with wide mouth; the first type of pot made and used by the ancestral parents
repulsive appearance as a result of physical degeneration; not worthy of associating with people, being leprous or ulcerated
n.f n
n
n
n a.
f
f ms
86
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
ókómbǒ n òkònì n òkònìbò$ n ókóóhía n
Òkòpìrì p.n. ókóró n ókórómá n òkòrònákòròná adv òkòtìbì n.
p.n. ókù n
ókú n òkùé n
Ókújágū p.n.
òkúkū n ókùlé n Òkùná p.n. Òkùná p.n. ókúnwéngíbǒ n Ókúrú p.n. ókúrú n ókúrú-ákpá n
ókpètè n ókpó n
òkpô n v
ókpóchú n òkpòká n
Ókpókìrì1 p.n. ókpókìrì2 n
ókpókíríbà n òkpòkíríóbóló n ókpókóró n Ókpókpó n
ókpóm n
SF
English gloss
one who bears leprous or ulcerated body and very feeble to walk people of Eleme
person from Eleme, man or woman
whitlow; a painful swelling on the finger containing pus (<Igbo) (also = sìyè; sìpìrì)
?
ankle-shoe or rain boot
water-passage connecting two water areas or rivers; a straight
totally; altogether; all at once
family head
name of one of the ancestral fathers and first settlers of Okrika mainland, thus Òkòpìrì (bush belonging to Oko) being named after him. He was the husband of the first woman settler, Tomaniaro cylindrical mortar
weekly or monthly contribution (<foreign)
message; errand
horse mackerel,
sedentary game played with seeds into ten holes
family in Okrika; also title name of Chief Chèyéábǔosọ, living in Ogueme Biri
pigeon; cuckoo
one of the satellite masks attached to ẹbẹ, usually decorated with sack family in Okrika, living in Awọlọme Biri
god of fire and smoke owned by Okuna family of Awọlọme Biri messenger; ambassador
family in Okrika, living in Ogueme Biri
raffia cloth
sack-like enlargement of the alimentary canal forming an organ of storage; the part of the body containing the stomach, belly or abdomen (in man and animals)
agile dance performed by men mostly, it is danced according to the rhythmic music supplied by the water-port music (íngú)
vegetative herbacous plant, also, ékpètè
imported masquerade, characterized by wild display, derived from the Ibibios or Efiks
balls of fufu (àkpàkùrù-òkpó) decomposed and sifted cassava
back of some creatures and canoe
helmet hat
bolt of a door
pipe for smoking
family in Ogoloma
name of dance or music play with the bass-drum, àkùsà
potto, nocturnal arboreal animal, characteristic of its tasteless meat and hard skin; it usually has either two or three toes on the front feet also known as sloth
spot, area
satellite mask accompanying the famous èbè masquerade
special box-like trap used in entrapping red land-crabs (ólù)
lump;
mass of any matter solidly placed e.g. nama-okpokpo, pulo-okpokpo, bùru-okpokpo etc.
mound; an elevated area of land; a portion of exposed land when the
f fm
fm fm
dc
fm
fg
87
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS òkpòngá n
òkpùkórómábò$ n òkpùtùkù n ólē n ólé-è-é excl.
òlègbè n Òlò n òlò
óló excl.
ólōgbólómā v Òlóìn p.n. òlòbò^ n òlóin-chìn n ólókó n ólókó
ólòkóbìrìbà n ólòkóbìrìbà-wàrì n ólókó-Ọókábǒ n ólókómíẹmíẹyè n ólókù v ólókú-tìbì n òlòkpō n ólóló n ólólósíngbá n ólómú a. ólómkpòkíkpòkí a. ólómúadápù n ólómsíkì n ólómsíkì adv. òlòsàní n òlòsàní
SF
English gloss
tide is at its ebb
wattle building usually made to claim or retain land; a temporary building; a dwelling place; a house of a sort
?
dirty dregs of liquid or stored water
open space for playing or dancing
expression used against a coveted taste or performance; a tacit admiration of someone's deeds also, élé-è-é
imaginary place where the dead go; fairy land also, èlègbè
pomade, ointment, cream
lovemaking
derisive expression used against a person of low rank who asserts; when fully expressed it is óló-òmè
to put together; to combine; collate (also = chírómā, kpéchīa) masquerade mostly played by the people of Kalio-ama
lover; someone having love deal with another, male or female
plant with linear leaves generally used as boundary plant
law or rule
whelk
spider
cobweb
outlaw; one not bound by law; freeman
precepts
to shout aloud
shouting; noise of shouting; echo
fish with dark skin commonly taken as black snapper
bottle
phlegm that comes out from the nostril when one is eating
advanced in age; old
very old
forefathers; ancestral parents; ancestors
in olden days;
ancient times
flannel cloth, blue black in colour
liver of cartilaginous fishes like the shark, sawfish etc.
ill-fated
land-crab; large reddish crab that bores deep holes near houses bitterleaf vegetable
well, hole
whose
your (pl.)
you (pl.)
throne; heavenly seat; an encircling large seat mostly used to enthrone ceremonial sedentary masks like oguoin of Ogu fame (on water) and Bolo fame (on land) (also =èmìnè)
raft used by the early Okrika before canoes
aged; elderly
slaves
bondage; slavery
slave pl. ómóní
slave trade or slave deal
market in OTELGA
ólósî a.
ólù nc òlúbù n
ólùlú n òmìnà(òmìnà) a.
ómíná a.
ómínè pron. òmìnè n
òmìnè n. ómóngí a. ómóní n ómóníbárábíe n ómóníbò$ n ómónítúbò n ómònó n
ms
f
f
88
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench Kịrịkẹ PoS SF
English gloss
ómònóm$ba n Òmòrò p.n. òngòrò n
ónìní n Ònné n ónóbū n ónóbúbǒkò n ónóní n ónú n
ònù n ónúkórómá v ònyèchiè`@ v ònyèchīèbí n ònyèchiè`@dìrí n ònyèchiè`@màyé n ònwòín n ónwóin v
ònwòiàrú n ónwūn n ópé(épé) n òpèkèlèpépē n
òpèlè n òpèpé n ópólí n ópólítón v
ópòrópò n òpù n.a. òpùamà n
Òpùàmbé p.n. òpùapù n
òpùayèmiè`@ v.a. òpùbò$ n òpùdàbò$ n Òpùdù`$bàyà p.n. Òpùẹbèrè p.n. òpùìgànì n Òpùìyò p.n. òpùkúbíesì n òpùmá adv òpùmèngì n Òpùngíríkò p.n.
ms fg
f tn
victory sign made by the fork of the fore-finger and the middle finger, usually applied in mockery against the loser
masquerade dance originally owned by the Agba Biri 'Pioru' mask club
fishing material made of bamboo sticks and two poles to edge the bamboo work; one edge is tied to the side of the canoe and the other side is held down by the two fishers into the water to sweep in fish along the coastal strip
large silkfish (íkìnjí)
town in OTELGA, also Ásákúrá
veranda-like passage; lounge in a building or compound (<Igbo)
gate of a fence
mercy; consideration for others (obs)
fencing with short sticks or broken canoe parts or planks to reclaim land
stench, odour esp. of human being; bad smell
to make feast or merriment; to entertain with feasting
to testify; to be a witness in a case; to pledge
witness; guarantor
testimonial records
testimonial guarantee; testimony
smoke
to bite
to bale out water from a canoe or boat
ship
sand
flannel cloth
confusionist; a double dealer; one who talks something different from what he does
thick
sun; morning sunshine; also (èpèpé) evening sunshine
basket
to administer; to explain, report, plan and account to a family or friendly circle of something
pig or swine (<Port.)
big; large; importance; dignity
fairyland; the place where dead bodies resulting from bad death are buried; bad bush lit. big town
family in Okrika living in Ambeme Biri
important personalities; also applied to the famous 'kiri owu' esp. when they are on a nocturnal parade or outing
being proud and arrogant; assertive
lit. big man; important personality
grandfather
family in Okrika living in Oba Polo
family in Okrika living in Biri
wrath; serious reproach
family in Okrika living in Edereme Biri
extreme unhappiness; misery
much; very much; greatly
flood; spring tide
family in Okrika living in Adedeme Biri
fm
fm fm
fm
fm
89
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS òpùnyèngìbò$ n
Òpùtìběyà p.n.
òpùwárī n òpùyè n òpù-yégíẹnmásínì n óré(éré) n
òrì pron. òrìa(òrà) a. óró n òròm(ú) n
órópò n óròrótùo adv
órú n
órúbíeàmà
órúbíefè
Órúbò$ p.n.
órúbérénémíapù n órúené n órúnjí n órúkóró n.v
órúmápánbá n
órúmíné p.n.
Órúpábó p.n. órútéké v.n órúwú n òsì n ósí v.n ósî v òsíkìrí n ósínyáná a. ósínyánáká n
a. ósíró v òsìròsìròbà n
òsòín n ótékété n
SF
fm
f f
English gloss
grandmother
name of the founder of Kirike; also family in Okrika, living in Awolome Biri and Oputibeya compound, near Kóróní-ógónò
temple; assembly house
some important happening or incident
printing press
women
he; himself
his
fungus
grouper, Epinephelus spp. A large big-mouthed greyish fish with fine scales
surgeonfish, Acanthurus monroviae
expression indicating co-incidental happening, proving true of expectation (óròrótùbò) abridged óròrótùo; in speech, luckily or fortunately (also = ìbìréré)
juju; idols such as objects like ógbólódòmé, ògónyō, àbàjì, òkòmbúlō, etc.
adept in some art such as an academician like PHD holder is termed 'Oru' in the sense that his expertise in the art venerates him to perform magically. He has become a "juju" so to say
the grey matter of the skull of fish, animals and human beings (Kal.) ?
?
family in Okrika living in Ngeme Biri; one who must have been rescued by the power of "juju" during illness
heathen; pagan; those who believe and practise fetishism
tday after Saturday, that is Sunday (obs)
smaller grouper (òròm(ú)) (also = bíedù`$ba)
practice of divination being possessed of some spirit, marine or ethereal; fetish-like practice exhibited in singing and dancing irreligiously; one so indulged is an órúkóróbǒ
cobwebs containing or carrying dust and small insects; also soot formed from smoke
a family in Daka house responsible for the dead during Elechu period (see Appendix iii under religion)
family in Okrika living in Ambeme Biri and around Kóróní-ógónò idolatry; worshipping idols, etc.
snake
snail
respect; hour
to spray from the mouth
sugar (<Eng. sugar)
respectable; honourable
dishonour
not respectable, not honourable
to chew and blow off any substance or chaff
chaff in the mouth after chewing; remains of any materials ground or sifted or filtered
grass (also = ìbrùá Ogu dialect)
convulsive ailment suffered by children
fishing where the net is used around the mangrove section selected as
fm
f
fm fm
90
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ
ótítá ótó
òtò
Òtòbò òtòbò òtòbò-àkpá
ótóin ótókú
ótólō
ótómā ótómádíkì ótómáyè ótómá-dàwòyè òtòngòlòbà
ótótólóbà òtùbò
nf Òtùmógbòlò p.n.
PoS SF
n n
num.
p.n. fm n
n
a.n n
n v
n n n
n suff.
English gloss
the spot, the catch is mostly mullet (dèkè)
dew
traditional bath place of a nursing mother; this is situated at the backyard or near the house, where a pit is dug, into which the cleansing water pours
term used in counting; in the commercial fish market all fishes are checked in twenties i.e., rackets (kasa) or pieces, thus twenty big fish (inji-anga), twenty kasa (sticks), etc.
family in Okrika, living in Agba Biri
hippopotamus
hude worn by graduates;
bag usually at the back of the 'otobo' masquerade as decoration
very sweet; pronounced sweetness
mid-day sunshine esp. during the dry season
upper part of the altar at the hearth where dried or cured fish is stored details in any branch of study, the squares on the face of the chess or draught-board (èpèlè-tòrú)
to compare or create a balance; to exemplify
presume; assume; compare
example; comparison; illustration
exemplified lessons; illustrations
that part of the brain cell of a child that shakes in corresponding beating of the heart; the neurone, usually at the meeting suture of the frontal and parietal bones of a child's cranium
decaying perforated log of wood in the mangrove forest
(suffix) usually affixed to other words (verbs) to indicate probability e.g. á b'otubo (whether she came) ò bòr'ọtubo (whether he passed) ò sosa'tubo (if he has gone)
small fish with protruding bill or mouth
popular deaf and dumb man from Oyika family who lived in Ngeme Biri
bald head; bare scalp of a person
cotton
wild and rough;
masculine; male
family in Awọlọme Biri
fast rate in pursuing things; imbalance; anxiety
hot temper; intemperance
to hasten or make faster; to accelerate speed or rate of anything
to scoop out or carve off in large bits
remora, sharksucker, Echeneidae; a clasping fish specially equipped with a sucking disc on the top of its head with which it clasps shark, sawfish, or any moving object in the sea like ship. It dangles there passing a symbiotic life without disturbing its carrier; a voracious eater; shark-sucker
hollow depth of water
to cry, bewail,
masquerade
mermaid
fight; war
ward in Ogoloma
tears hanging around the canthus of the eye as if one intends to cry
òtùbùlù
ówélé n ówō n ówói a.
n Ówói p.n.
ówóibûọ n ówóikúbíe n ówóimà v ówókō v ówókú n
òwòlò n ówú v.n ówú n
ówú n
òwù n Ówú Bírì p.n ówúakámbúlò n
fm
f
91
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
ówúamápù n òwùàmìẹmíẹyè n ówúapú n òwùbíekùanpú n ùwùbíekùnbàrá n òwùbíekùònwúnì n ówúbíebíebéré n ówúbíríayè p.n. ówúbǒ n ówúmángí n
ówúelé n ówúpúkó n
ówúpúkó-chúà v ówúméngí n òwùnì n ówúníní n òwùniògbó n ówúókólò n
ówúókpárà n ówúsárà n
òwùsō v ówútíbí n ówúyábò$ n
óyí n òzù n Òzúbò$kò p.n.
òzùkìrí n òzùkòrí v
SF
ms
English gloss
mermaids of the sea strife; warfare
men sg. ówúbǒ captives
captivity
captured soldiers
an ancient masquerade
costume for masquerade decoration
man pl. ówúapú
Traditional chasing game is held in the market square during the evening just before the evening market when new corn appears. A chaser holds two 3ft bamboo sticks (agbagba) with which he is aided to corner his captive. The chased hold in their hands horns with openings on the body for blowing as bugle. Each captive pays a fine. At the close of each days game, all fines are collected and used in buying sugar cane or cigarette or fruits for consumption lit. racing by masquerading
open layout found in the mangrove forest close to seas and banks where, it is supposed, mermaids exercise themselves and play
crying or weeping voice
tone of taling masquerade, like kiriowu
putting the voice of masquerade that is, yodelling like the kiriowu tears that drop
fighters; soldiers
?
troop of soldiers
gulf, narrow indentation into the island or town, original gutter connecting the waterside
satellite mask that accompanies a major mask
open space at the waterside where men casually assemble to chat, breeze, and gossip, whiling away time
to have a physical encounter with someone; to fight
sound of cry or lamentation; wailing
person possessed of some marine supernatural agency, usually believed to have been espoused to a mermaid; also one who behaves under the influence of hallucination
ten in counting
farmland (<Igbo)
village noted for religious healing of the Christ Army Church, situated along Canaan, near Port Harcourt
farmland
to work on farmland; to farm
92
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS Ọ,ọ
Ọ,ọ
ò pron. ó pron. Óbá p.n. Óbá p.n.
Óbá Pólò p.n. óbá n óbà n óbá n òbà n óbèkébèkè adv òbèlí v
òbí v
òbìángā v.a. òbìà(sín) adv. óbírí a. óbò n óbǒ n óbò$gùrù n òbókō n òbǒkōtíbíkù n óbǒkú n òbò$kùbò$kù n
òbò$kùrù n òbòlí n Òbònì p.n.
òbò$nò n
SF
fm
English gloss
vowel, the twenty-fourth letter of the Okrika alphabet he, him
you (pl.), all of you
family in Okrika
title of the traditional ruler of Ogbaland (Ọmọkụ) in ALGA of Rivers State
area taken as a ward or quarter in Okrika
yam barn (usually as kept by the Eleme and Ikwerre)
calabash container with cover
slang meaning gone for nothing; a waste
sickness characteristic of pains and swellings
probably; perhaps; maybe; peradventure, also (ébèkébèkè)
to move carefully meandering in pursuit of someone; carefully moving through buildings and caves
to be careful; to be on the look out; to be vigilant; take care; to mind oneself
to be thrifty
perhaps; probably; peradventure
smart; fast; quick
native guitar
turtle
pumpkin fruit with broad vegetable leaves (<Igbo)
fowl of the rasorial group
bush fruit resembling cockscomb
covenant; agreement; oath; testament
lazy tsetsefly with white spots on the wings; it becomes weak as it sucks and cannot easily fly off
cockroach; nocturnal flat insect (also = tònjìeb-ímà)
small shiny nose
social club whose drumming instruments are played in an enclosure, never exposed
seeds of bush-mango (ófìón) used in making soup (<Igbo)
a small crab black or dark grey in colour. It oddly appears at unexpected places; it is a silent obscure creature
himself
back of anything
to be at the rear; not progressive; to retrogress; to get behind disciplines; followers
to back someone by posture; happening immediately after someone's presence; to get off from a spot for a while (also = òbù`$pákà, bûbílémâ)
to take bribe
bribe; bribery
behind, back
posterity
after all; afterwards later
page; orderly
last; to be at the tail end
to get aside for a while; to get behind waiting
descendants; offsprings progeny
òbò$púlō
òbù`^
òbù`$
òbù`dā òbù`d`ùkóàpú òbù`$gbīn
òbù`$fī` òbù`$fìyé òbù`$jú òbù`$jùábù`$ọ òbù`$kó òbù`$kòrùbǒ òbù`$kùlùmá òbù`$pákà òbù`$pàkàbóyé
nc
pron. n
v.a.
n v.adv .
v
n n.a. n adv. n
v
v
n
f
93
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
ọdè`$lè n ódò n ọdò$ n.v. ọdù`$ n
ódûm(ú) n ófíanyé n ófín v ófínsîn v ófírì a.n
ófírídù`$pàrìmgb n òlù
ófíríkùbìe n ófírímá n ófírímà v ófìsì n ófóịn v ófóịnbóayé n òfòkùbà n ófóngó v.n Ọ$gán p.n. ògànkúọ n ògèín n ògì n Ọ$gìẹmé Biri p.n. ógízì n
ógō n ógóbáráfìyè n
ógófíyè n
ògònó n ògónõ́ a.n ògònòfórù n ògònògìẹnyè n ògònògónò a.adv
. ógú n ógù n ógúbíemgbòlù n
Ọgudire p.n. ògùrèfī a.v. ògùrò n ógbégbé(egbegbe) n
ògbòkó a.n. ógbóló n ógbúdú n ógbúnúnú n
SF
English gloss
vulture (also = ìndù)
yam-digger in form of a pointed short pole or stick, (also =ódù) dress; fashion
soup prepared with the liquid derived from mangrove ashes and water or liquid salt or lime stone
python, ‘boa constrictor’
refuse; gatherings from sweeping
to sweep
to sweep off
hot;
fever or feverish,
brilliant
brimstone; sulphur
zeal lit. hot tempered
shark
to warm; to make hot e.g. water, soup
work place (<Eng. office)
to grab; to seize
loot; spoil; captured property
corner of a building
fan
family in Okrika, living in Ogan Polo
hawk
small fish with a glassy transparent body
gonorrhoea; venereal disease
ward in Ogoloma
leaves of smoked tobacco encased in cartons; tobacco leaf that is usually ground as snuff or smashed for piping, also diri-ógízì
in-law between son, father and mother
food or presents from in-laws, son or daughter and their relatives; also ógófíyè (also = fuaye)
food or presents on behalf of a daughter, from in-law (also = ọgọbarafịye, fuaye)
market place
top; above
north wind
superscription
careless; not done with discreetness; haphazardly
vegetable of fluted pumpkin; vegetable leaves native hoe (<Igbo)
fluted pumpkin, Telfairia spp.
family in Okrika; title name of Chief Amiesimaka amazed to satisfaction
beard; also ogure (<Kal.)
large and fierce cartilaginous fish, like the shark, with sharp grained skin
tall elegant person; handsome man
large baracuda (dǒró); tall person, so nicknamed
thick mangrove swamp; bog
roof-beam, long stick used to form the ridge of a roof
fm b
f
fm f
f
94
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS ógbúnúnúchúa v
òhá n òhóm n óín excl. òjì n
ójí n Ójú p.n. ójúfénì n
òjùkùrù n òjúlè p.n.
òkázī n ókélì n
ókì v ókíchú v òkìmá v ókímún adv òkō adv ókó n
v. òkò n
òkò v. ókóbó n ókòbò& n
ókófírí n òkòkó n òkòkòchúa v.a.
òkòkòpákúmà v.a. òkòlòbà n òkòlòbàpìké v
òkòlòbì n òkòmbílō p.n. ókóró n ókórónámá n òkòtòmá adv òkù p.n.
òkùa n
SF
t
fm b
ms
English gloss
forming a single file or being in long rows of line like soldiers or school children marching
hard crisp vegetable used in cooking (<Igbo)
unexpected happening; accident (<Kal.) Okrika is būapákáyé phonic expression meaning take or "have it"
iroko tree or wood
kola nut (<Igbo) Okrika is ídápó
family in Okrika, living in Ambeme Biri and Kalio's compound ostrich, named after Chief Daniel Oju Kalio being the person who introduced this creature into Okrika
conical net spread by casting skilfully
nickname given to any lazy person; also of one time armour bearer of the popular akarikpo masquerade of Jama house, who took a picture with the masquerade
hard vegetable wildly grown in thick forests, used in cooking (<Igbo) large fish-tray made of palm frond material or cane, used in spreading the catch, preparatory to processing the fish for setting on the rackets (kasa) against curing or smoking
to take or receive
to admit into a society or school or group (also = dàchú)
to direct a boat or canoe with the paddle or oar
as long as; until
accordingly; like that
white mangrove, Laguncularia racemosa, whose leaves are narrow, long and pointed, and produce salty liquid on the stomata
to hire, contract
ulcer, chronic sore
to vomit forcefully; to cough out with force as when a bone disturbs the oesophagus
stick with hook end generally used as rafter from the ridge of a roof hireling; one who takes upa contract to do some work
iron material used as hinges to suspend door shutters; also applied as staple and hasp
hired labour or contract
foam on the surface of water
having foam produced; bearing foam like sour soup which has become fermented
producing lather or foam like soap or hard pulling of paddle or steam engine on water
corner stone, border line; the corner post marking the end or border of a building
to make or mark the border line of a building. Custom akin to laying the foundation stone of a building where people gather, offer prayers and pin pegs to start the border lines, and end with drinking
parrot
deity of Ibaka
tusk of elephant; horn of animal
buffalo
accordingly
masquerade that maintains discipline by flogging with a long cane always in hand
bush-fowl
t
ms
95
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS òkùbálìbá p.n.
ókúẹín(ékúéín, v ókúóín)
n ókúẹịnbípí n ókúẹín-èbèrè n ókúẹín fáríayè n ókúẹínfínjí v
òkùẹìnmā v.a. ókúẹín-íngbólù n ókúẹín-nímé n ókúẹínpíkía v.n ókúẹínsímà v ókúẹínsómâ v ókúẹíntíbí n ókúẹínwásā v òkú-ínémíká int.
p.
òkùkù n òkùkùménò int.
p. òkùmà conj. conj.
ókụ&ọdū n ókùrù n òkpánī n ókpárá n
òkpèín n
ókpó n ókpō n ókpóchì p.n. òkpòkúlò n òkpòtò n òkpù n òkpù n. òkpùrùkpú n Òlé p.n. óló n ólō v ólōchíẹmà v òlókō n
SF
ms
English gloss
rice-fruit (<Igbo)
rascally masquerade usually engaged in chasing children with canes in hand; legendry has it that he is a water mermaid that lives more in the mangrove forest. He is also named òkùkù
to talk or speak
speech
language; speech
talkative person; chatterbox, noisemaker
talking instruments (see Appendix v)
to introduce issues at a speech making
to be on talking terms as of non-enemies; to hold talks with
words
poem
debate; to argue; to partake in a symposium or quiz or discussion
to speak ill of someone; to err in speech
to make an allusive statement of one to another person
subject matter; main talk; principal idea
to spread information; to announce; to publish; broadcast
interrogative statement generally made to a retortive answer or expression when someone retorts after realising his folly; term is put to him meaning Didn't you know it before? Full expression is 'si-ọkụ' ínémíká? (Didn't you know that it is bad or wrong) the 'si' is usually dropped (slang)
mermaid that lives in the mangrove, fond of flogging
interrogative expression drawing a parallel from the behaviour of okuku against a stubborn, disobedient person (slang)
but
yet
bugle or trumpet (<Igbo) (also = èpèlèpé)
vegetable fruit, slimy in nature
yellow yam
loop or snare for hooking or entangling the neck and mouth of a victim preventing him from shouting
basket container used in preserving dry pepper or fish, usually kept on the altar of the hearth (also = kúrú)
first born male child (<Igbo) Okrika is táríbǒ
he-goat
idiomatically, a womanizer
stinging beans, used in thickening soup
secrete message
masquerade played by Bulome Biri people
cotton-reel
dregs
fufu ball prepared for swallowing
disease of the vagina
palm fruit with hard nut
town in Okrika District, near Ogu
cough
to hold; to handle
to hold on; to restrain
abusive term given to soft and lazy creatures, e.g., òkpò lókō ípà (soft-
ms
96
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS òlòkùâ a.
òlú n òmbè n òmbí v ómbó n ómbófúrú n.v
ómbósó n
ómbú n òménbú n òmì n ómíná a. òmìnà(òmìnà) a. ómínábù pron. ómó n òmō n òmọdà n òmònbò- n ìkàtànìbò$
òmònbùlòbà n òmònbùlòbà
ómòngo n ómú n ómúarú n ómúarúwárì n ómúbárábì n ómúbò$ n ómúbíekùnbàrà n ómúbíekún-òwúnì n ómúgbín v.n ómúkú n ómúkúbúlù p.n.
òmùmú n òmùmùògbó n ómútí v.n
ómúwárí n ònà n
òná n ònànàòwú p.n.
óndé(éndé) num. òndègbòlúgbòlí n
SF
English gloss
back crab)
held together in twist; hooked up as two wrestlers or fighters entangling
second born in family male or female
chance; room; aspect, also èmbè
to rub; smear on the skin
nightfall
when the moon peers; reference to the moon as it appears immediately after nightfall (also = akalupu)
brightening colour of the sky as reflected by the appearing moon; the moon, before appearing of that time, is also described as sòkòròmá small mullet sp. (dẹkẹ)
sandflies (also = ígbírígídí, èménbú)
bush flower whose pollen dust is irritating
your (pl.)
whose
yourselves (pl.)
drum with baritone tone (Ogu dialect)
ebb tide
small tilapia
'ịkata' fisher man who goes afishing lately esp. during neap tide (mgbopuma mengi)
wart
floating materials tied to the top line of fishing net to aid the net afloat for security
mug (<Eng.)
war
war-canoe; big house comprising families
war-canoe house that is major house comprising branches
victory; triumph
warrior; fighter
captivity
captured soldiers
to wage war; warfare
fight between small groups of bodies; skirmish
special masquerade played by the Adedeme Biri people during funeral obsequies; it is usually accompanied with dancing and singing of war songs and agile demonstrations
flies
swarm of flies
to jubilate around town, singing war-songs and firing guns esp. during performance of funeral ceremony by war songs and dancing all in praise of the deceased
fortress (also = òwùnìwàrí)
dark cloth or calico, usually worn for mourning; also, the fish commonly called golden fish
golden fish
satellite masquerade, dressed in dark cloth, which accompanies the ẹbẹ mask
four hundred in counting
child birth at short intervals, children born at short intervals, looking short in size (also = èndègbòlúgbòlú)
f
mi f
ms
f ms
97
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
óngí v óngbón v Óngbóánga p.n. óngbóayémá n
ónìnì n ónjú n ònónjū excl.
ònùngò n ònùnù n ònùnùmà n ónwéín n ónwéín a. ònwènè n ònyè v ónyé n òọbé excl.
òpèrē v ópíkípìkì n ópìpí n òpò n
òpòchúkù n òpòkùrù n òpòkùrùbíe n òpòpòlí n òpòròpó n ópótókó n Òpútā p.n. òpútā n òpùnè n
ópúrù v òrédù n
òrà a. óré(éré) n órí v òrì n
óríbáráríbárá a. óríọ excl.
óríókúriò`$kù adv òriò`$máriò`$má a.
óríyé n óróín n òròínmà adv.
SF
fm
mi y
c mi
English gloss
to peel (yam or cocoyam)
to beg; to ask for politely
family in Ogoloma
supplications demands from a giver of higher rank (also = bìayèmá (biblical)
canopy for shelter (<Eng. awning)
line of weaving on a basket or mat
abusive term used on babies or children who are fond of sucking their thumb; also fond of sucking
waves of the sea tempest
organ; accordion; the native lyre
pounded yam; yam fufu
cough-like asthma; appearing persistently like indigo or ink on the skin small crab (ípà)
rattle bells tied on the wrist and ankle
to watch with a motive to audit accounts
spice for cooking
retaliatory mockery expression usually pronounced on an aggressor, who fails at last
to belch out (also= èpèrē)
giddiness; swaying about resulting from dizziness; fits
mouse; idiomatically used to describe a pilferer
corner between walls of buildings; indentations along the coast of the mangrove forest; family section or group
hearth where fire is made
lane between two buildings; narrow passage in between buildings inside of a narrow passage between buildings
boil on the skin
lungs or windpipe of fish
mud; bog; swamp
family in Okrika, living at Alawarị
big fish like the golden fish but has unpleasant taste
slimy substance formed on keels of canoes, walls, tanks, ship's body, etc.; algae
to collect a whole mass of things
yam produced through sexual reproduction, that is not by tuber; the rind is violet in colour and tastes sugary (Dioscorea bulbifera)
his
name
to see
pubic hair on the private part of the body in between the groins at the lower part of the abdomen; pubes
anyhow; in a careless manner (also = ọriòkụ-riòku)
utterance commonly used to punctuate or terminate expression, denoting someone's irregular behaviour or performance; also used as a verb e.g. i oriome (you've erred)
anyhow; in a careless manner (also = ọrịbararịbara)
symmetrical arrangement of any type of decoration e.g. plaiting of hair, hairdo, meshes of net, etc.
vision; something envisaged
tsetse fly
stealthily and unnoticeably silent and avoiding being disturbed
fm f
y
98
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
òrósì n òrù1 n òrù2 n
órúaniò`@rúanì pron. órúbǒ bǒ adv. òrùtón a. òrùtònmá v.adv ósìkō n òsòmbùrù n òsúkū n òsùmā v
ósún v òsụ&n v ótàrà n
ótón adv òtùtù n òvó n
ówā n òwèrèwé n òwòkò n
ówólō n ówú n òwùmá v
óyà n óyá excl. óyī a. óyòkóyòkò adv òyòròyó n
P,p
P,p
páà adv. pábō v pábûmā v
pàín v pàín
páká v pàká a. pákábó v
SF
English gloss
rice (<Portuguese arroz)
size; age; things in varied sets or groups
line of meshes of a net; a portion of something verse of a chapter in a book
each and everyone (in groups)
everyone individually; one by one (also = órúbǒrūbò#, bòbò) orderly; arranged in regular sequence
to keep aright to perform or order things carefully and distinctly hiccough
gnats or sandflies (also = èménbū)
palm fruit with soft nut (also = imbiba)
to cause to vomit to cause to pour our e.g. obnoxious drug reacting on someone
to vomit
to pour over as overflowing
pounded yam ('dumbai' or 'fufu'); also used for fermented and pounded cassava (akpakuru)
nearly, wanted to
small sardine or small herring
oracle symbol or oracle medium meant to predict views and thoughts; pronouncement of fortune or fate by blessing or cursing, that is ' òvó kari' or ' òvó gbolo'
mark of victory of honour inscribed by dubbing white chalk on the forehead or any part of the body of the victor
mane; the fur of animals around the neck or back, overgrown beard, e.g. lion, he-goat, horse, etc.
dance performed casually and leisurely in tone with music supplied by singers and water-pot drums
fish noted for good taste grunrwe or big eye
vapour; air; heat; breath; power or strength
to overhear; getting information not from the speaker's source; to be aware of
pawpaw fruit
to start moving or to carry out a procedure (<Yor.)
painful; aching
perhaps, maybe, peradventure, probably (colloq.)
fermented cassava that is grated and sifted; condensed flour of fermented cassava
consonant, the twenty-fifth letter of the Okrika alphabet
just fairly; yet; still
to be older than
to cause self or someone to be naked; to be naked to render something bare; to impoverish
to utter the characteristic cry of a cook;
to utter inarticulate cry of a mob; to crow like a cock to go out; to shoot out like young plant
revealed; exposed; e.g. a hidden information, etc. amount to, come up to (also = pákámún)
f
dc f
99
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
pàkàbǒ n.a. pákáchíẹ a.v pàkàpákádò$kì a. pákápákáyé n pàkàpụ n pákí v pákúmà v pàlàngí a.
v
pálī v pàlìángápú n pálíbò# n pàlìmā v pàlìmà v.a.
pàlìmà v. pàlìmápákáyé n pámū v pán$ a. pánbá a.
pànbà n pànbàbùsòká n pànbàòwú n
pàngà n
pánì n pá-ókí-nà ph. pànkíkà n pàpá n pàpâ adv. pàpábò$ n. pàpábù n.a. pàpásìmé a. pàpáy^e n pàràfínì n pàràngā n pàràpàrá a. párī v pàrī a.
pásīsī excl.
pàtàlà a. péémà adv. p^e (pee) adv. pèí v pèìmá adv. pèkè(bịẹ) n pékélē v
SF
English gloss
popular; known; known person
towering; to take position in the scheme of things
officious; showy; fond of putting oneself forward over issues
common happening; regular incident
kinsmen; neighbours
to pawn; to mortgage
to take or remove out from a place of keeping
congealed with slime;
to clear something of a slimy nature with struggle (with raised account pálángí)
to shut in; to close
neighbours
helper
caught red-handed in an act
being pressed by nature e.g. to urinate, defecate, deliver a child; choked
to support
sudden happening, accident
to lead someone; to escort
looking pale and whitish
empty finished, idiomatically meaning reduced in health and wealth (obs.)
wings; leaf or page of a book
large mangrove bird with long and broad wings
dancing masquerade with flat circular headgear decoration; also àdàòwú
instrument used in bailing water out from a container like, boat, canoe, tank, etc.
any material made of pan or tin (<Eng. pan)
presume; assume
pan-cake (<Eng.)
form of address to a father by his child
just; ordinary; ordinarily
ordinary person; commoner
naked; nakedness
idle; desolate
ordinary thing; irrelevance
kerosene (<Eng. parafin)
liver
very sweet; sugary in taste
to plait hair; to take someone to task; to entwine
twisted as of tightly entangled knot; elastic to a point as of pounded yam or fufu
expression to entreat someone for consideration; seeking the pleasure of someone
broad and flat
shouting rudely with evil intention on somebody's name
here; this way
to eat fish
falling flat, possibly with face downward
groins; area between the thigh and the pubes
to turn an object here and there in order to examine it
ms
100
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS pèkèlé v
pékélédíkì v pékélédíkíayèmá n péképéké a. péképékémà adv. pékéré a. pèkèrè n pékérē v pékérébò$ n pékérēbó v pékérèpákúmábó v pélé v pélébǒkó n pélégbín v pélékóró n pèlèlé v pèlèlèpélélé a. pélémā v pèlèmá v péléókí v
pélépákányó n pélésíkímà v pél ésín v pémpém a. pénbé adv. pénbémá a. péndē v pèndèré a. péngē a. pénī v
SF
English gloss
to jump in a semi-somersaulting manner for joy esp. during 'owu' display
to examine thoroughly; to review
meditations (rel.)
flying like flag; distant
rushing from a distance without break, arousing anxiety in people
half or fraction
side; part; portion
to answer; reply
redeemer
to save, redeem
to ransom
to cut
window
to cut down; to fell or hew down a tree
passage; corridor; verandah
to deviate course or divert to another direction
unsteady or slippery in behaviour
to siphon; to pour (liquid) from one container into another
to forestall; to overtake
to deduct from money or material; to curtail and take; to counterbalance
short cut; back door
to cut aside; separate
to cut off; to reduce
light; membranous; thin
even
similar; like; about
to dance joyously out of tempo
disfigured in shape e.g. dimpled empty tin
bent; not regular
to press aside the outer skin in order to expose the inner part
special fish chosen for food
wealth; rich and wealthy
to flee all of a sudden; to vanish like a criminal
fear expressed by the beating of the heart
butterfly or moth
membranous and distended to a point of bursting
underwear for women like a short frock (<Eng. petticoat)
fish sp.
ceremony performed in honour of a dead chief or warrior by his first daughter and two others (see Appendix iii)
ancient masquerade
to jubilate profusely
lazy, the expression, 'íkúlápésì' is usually attributed to a very lazy person
low level; a valley
plump with good, soft physique; fleshy all round in balanced symmetry broad and flat commonly used to describe the head, thus tíbí pètèré (flat head)
underwear for women (<Eng. petticoat)
maize, corn (also ìpìangbá)
pèìnjí
pèré pérémmà pérémpérém pérí
pèrìpèrí pètíkòtì pèrìá pérígó
pérígbò pérítí pèsì
pèsī` pètèkìpétékí pètèré
pètíkòt piamgba
nf a.n v.adv
a.
n
a.
n nf p.n.
n ms v
a.
n id. a.
n n
101
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
píánī v píjù adv. píkē v píkéchíẹmà v píkí v píkī v pìkí conj. pìkí v. pìkìá n.v píkíchíẹmá v píkīdǔkò v píkī-íbó v pìkìmà- n òkùẹìngbòtù
pìkịnā conj. píkírī v pìkìrìpíkírí a. píkírí'jàpù n píkírípìamgbà n píkó n pìlàkí a. pìlákì(pìnlákì) n pìlípìlí n
pím n
pímbē v pínā a. pínābǒ n píndémā v
pínì n pínī v pínjī v
pìorú n piò`$rú-pákábó v
pípī v pípíkòló adv.
pípīpákúmà v
pì$rì n pìrí v pìrìamábò$
pìrìàyè n pìrìkàmbúlò n
SF
English gloss
to cause to stick to with paint, glue here; this way
to pin; to anchor or berth like a ship to implant or anchor firmly
to deny; to gainsay
to turn something
and, again (also pìkịnā)
to turn about or over; to convert
competition; a challenge; to contend
to dare; to perform defiantly
to interprete; to translate
to pervert; to lead astray; to blaspheme antonym; word opposite in meaning to another
and; also; again (also pìkí)
to mix; to stir
unsteady and slippery in manners
mixed cassava (also = ápálápá)
mixed maize (usually with ripe plantain) feather
very soft; sticky slimy
plank (<Eng.)
bird sp. (= íkpíkpī in Ogoloma dialect); also, nickname for a child fond of urinating while asleep
tingle; some sensation in a person for some happening (ọ bù pịm bè kẹ) i.e.; no feeling in him
to have sexual intercourse
white
white man
to effect a mixture for a thickening and sweetening result in cooking; to add some ingredient to thicken or sweeten or savour the soup or gravy
pin (office, safety, etc.) (<Eng.)
to strip off the skin, rind or bark etc.
to gradually ooze out from an original or parent body or a container e.g., juice from a tree, liquid from a tube
to makean unexpected appearance (pínjīpáká)
set of face-worn masquerades with long bills usually played by Agba Biri people
to escape from tribulation or difficult experience or encounter
to manage with meticulous care; to continue discussing an issue unnecessarily; to bring as a child from its cradle with the strictest care and economy e.g. an orphan
perfect silence cautioned; slight sensation
to wean up an infant esp. an orphan; to help out a helpless child to earn a livelihood
bush
to give
dweller in the bush; people from the hinterland e.g. the Igboman lit. bushman (pl. pìrìamápù)
offerings; gifts
poisonous spider
ms
102
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS pìrìkìká n
pìriòbírì n pìrìóbǒkō(ọkụa) n pírírì a.adv
pírírìpírírì adv. (prírìprírì)
pìrìyē n písī v pìsí a. pìsíjùlè(pú) a. písírímā v
písímā v pìtàkí a.
póchū v póchúkú n pókī v pókō v
pókō v pókóló a. pókóló n pókōsín v pókú n pòkú n pókú num. póló n pòló v,a. pólō v pólóchó v.n
póm n.v pòndó a.v pónì n pònīa n
pònjí v
pònjí n póō v póō v póō v
SF
English gloss
bush biscuit; bush fruit of brown pods whose substances taste like biscuit when cracked to eat
wild dogs found in packs and bushes; jackals
bush fowl
escaping in quick succession e.g., bullets from the muzzle, faeces from the anus
smartly moving here and there; appearing evey where within a short time
tribute; gift; present; token
to scratch
wet
totally wet; completely drenched and soaked from heavy rain
to remove chaff from grains by rubbing the grains with the fingers as from friend groundnuts; also; to disintegrate any dry substance, into smaller particles by pressing it with the fingers dry leaves, dry native chalk, alligator-pepper etc;
to wet; to soak in water; to make wet
usually used as an intensifier to 'lọkọ' thus lọkọ-pìtakị; i.e., very soft to the point of being sticky and slimy
to force in; to add an idea to someone's speech
latrine; place for passing out faeces
to listen
to use pin or needle to pick out something from a substance e.g. jigger from the body, periwinkle (isam) from its shell; also to make a hollow by scratching e.g. dog, digging a hole; fowl making a scratch
to drop off; to release from a hooked condition or a hanging position tall and lanky with hollow stomach
cave; den
snatch away, release or remove from a stock where it hangs
waterside, anchorage
bat
quantity; bundle; 8000 in counting
ward, quarter
burst; punctured; perforated
to puncture; to cause a hole
custom whereby a young man is initiated into the regular customary contributions such as burials in a family; he is thus regarded as full fledged person and achieves manhood. The qualification for this status could, in a modern light, be based on being a taxable adult, working, marrying and being on one's own business that is, outfitting his fishing occupation or enterprise
fart, diffused bad smell; to diffuse bad gas
disfigured by pressure like a dimpled tin
pound sterling (<Eng.)
tongue-sole, Cynoglossus spp. Two common species are álápónìa or álápúínjī=álínjì
to press and squeeze (one's hands) or press out water from wet cloth or oil from palm oil fibre
white kernel from unripe palm fruit
to castrate an animal
to force open a locked door
to rape
f
103
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS pòpó n
pósí n
pòsì n pòtòmpòtóm a. pótónì n pú v pùá v púā v.a. púfínjì v púgálágálámà v pùkò n pùkọdò$kí v.a.
pùkògbùrùgbú n pùkòkpoò`@ a. pùkòkpòmā v pùkòmgbòlú n
pùkoò`$ló v pùkòòlòlò n
pùkòpín a. pùkòsámíná a. pùk òsòlìmā a. pùkòtà'n a. pùkòtàrí v
púlā a. púlámā v púlámà n pùlò n pùlòpùlópùlò a. pùlòpùlófènìbà n pùlòsètíbísàrā v púmá v pùmbò n pùmbòbá v pùmbú v púmbúró n pún a. púndā v.a. púnmā v púúnmà adv púnú n pùnú v pùnùkórómā v púnúmā v
poò`@sì (pòsí) n púrā v pùràmá v
SF
English gloss
locally produced cloth by the people of Popo and Ghana
equals who grow together thus pósíógbó (group of equals); pósípáká (equals from childhood
cat (<Eng. pussy) (può$sì)
very soft; over-ripe as of fruit
puncheon; cask containing oil
to split; break
to separate
to mock, flatter
to explain broadly and explicitly; to give details of something
shatter; to break into pieces (also = púkósímà)
throat, covetousness neck
fond of depending on the food of others or on other people property; to be covetous
throat; oesophagus; tube connecting the gullet to the stomach
capable of resisting hunger
to withstand hunger
throat by which food passes to the stomach; gullet; idiomatically applied to mean covetous
to check or try to withstand hunger or thirst
trachea, the tube from the larynx to the bronchii; windpipe (also = kálápùkò)
hanging in the throat; unable to swallow
lit. dry throat; thirsty
jealous; creating attration or likeness
contented; satisfied
to long for food, drink, water, clothing, sexing etc); feeling of desire, lust
tastless; sour; defiled
to defile; to desecrate
bitterleaf
blood; oil (tábá-púlò)
red
weaver-bird
anoint; (also = mìẹfíafíamà)
to slice into smaller pieces
bad or foul air exuded from the anus; fart
to pollute the air by exuding fart
to totter; moving as if wanting to fall
chaff; pieces; fragments; crumbs
shut; blind; filled up; blocked
to oppress; to suppress one's feelings etc.
to blockade; to shut or close
to sneak or move stealthily (also = ménép úmà)
‘fox’
to press
to subdue
to pressurise; to overcome by placing much pressure on; to accuse innocently
pussy, cat (<Eng. pussy)
to carry
to take refuge with absolute surrendering (also = sìsìmà)
ma
104
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
púráyé n pùrùkú a. v.
pùrùkùpúrúkú id. pùrùpùrú a. pùrùpùrùòbò$kō n púrúrùpáká a. púrúrùpákáyé n púsárà v púwásā v
R,r R,r
SF
English gloss
load, burden; responsibility
rumpled;
to ruffle up
in a rough bundling up
disorderly; untidy; scattered; unkempt fowl with unkempt feathering appearing suddenly; accidental accident
to tear or break in pieces
to cut open widely as of cloth; to spread abroad as information or declaration
a consonant, the twenty-sixth letter of the Okrika alphabet. The letter, R,r, is one of the unproductive letters as word-beginning. Its main importance lies more on its inevitable peculiar grammar usage. Thus the suffix-rē or réré, is mostly used in forming words by affixing to other words. Its functions are (i) to express and denote the meanings of only, unless, except; (ii) to introduce prepositional clauses and phrases. Thus
árì-rē Is it she that?.......
àrì-rē Is it these that?......
be-ré unless he .......... only he ............ Is it he that ......
fà-ré Unless it is finished......
fì-rè Unless death .............. only death ................
ìnì-rē Unless they ............... Except they ...............
ìrí-ré Is it you that? ........... only you that? ............
ìrì-rē Except I .................. Is it I that? .............
ìrì-rē Except I .................. Is it I that? .............
ìrù-rē Only drink that ...........
má-ré Is it she that? ...........
mí-ré Only this:................. Is it this that?...........
ómínè-rē Unless you ................
Òrì-ré Unless he himself .........
sī-ré Unless it is bad ..........
ìbìmáréré It is all well that........
ìbíréré It is well that ...........
ò bòréré Unless he comes ...................... It is only when he comes that ........
ò bò$ró-réré Unless he passes ..................... It is when he passes that ............
òrì ọkọ-réré Unless he accepts ..................... Only when he accepts that ............
radio (<Eng.)
feeling tired and disturbed physically
ring worn on the finger (<Eng.)
ruler (<Eng. ruler)
rédiò n règèrègé a. ríngì n rúlà n
105
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS S,s
S,s
sá n sábá v sábátélí n sàbáìn n sábámà v sádérí v sáfí v sáín(mú) adv
SF
English gloss
consonant, the twenty-seventh letter of the Okrika alphabet debt; anything owed; a score-point in a game
to cross; to go over to an opposite place
bridge, ferry
soap (<Port.)
to pass on; to take to the other side
to sell on credit
to owe
throwing oneself down consciously e.g. at a bathing pool, springing from a pier into the water (see náínmú)
turbot, Psettodes belcheri [RF]
serge, woollen cloth, twill, worsted; (<Eng.)
elegant and austere looking magnificent
wide apart (like large ears)
start
vocative expression used in calling the attention of listeners during story telling
to start doing
fish sp.
to give on credit; (also = sápírí, sádérí)
distant, aloof
behaving in an unconcerned manner; getting aloof from others; nonchalant behaviour
more than required
to leave off with consideration; to let go with discretion
opposite
key
dry
to urinate; also used as adjective to describe nightfall (éné-sán)
to fling; to spray
dry branch of any plant
melt
alligator pepper
to sign a document to append one's signature (<Eng. sign) glistening; shining in oily colour; "shineshine"
urinal; place for urinating
credit sale, giving article of sale on credit (also = sakoroma)
refuse heap; dung hill (a.) reduced e.g. swelling
to pour or drop
chorus in singing
small greyish hopping larva or insect commonly found among refuse heaps
to abandon; to leave off completely
to be quick; in haste; to be fast; quickly
to force womanhood on a girl who has been impregnated before the 'Ịrịa' ceremony
to overhear; to reach somebody by hearing (also = òwùmá)
light; not heavy; simple and accessible; easy; reduced in weight
to renew power as of charm; to revitalise
distant; apart; not in close contact
sàjí nf sájì n
sákáín a. sàkàlá a.
sákī v.n sàkíe excl.
sákímīè v
sàkò nf sákórómá v
sàlá a. sàlàmá adv
sààmā adv. sàámâ-bárásīn v sàmàsámá a. sámbì n sámíná a. sán v sánā v sángá n sàní v. sàní n sánī v sànísàní a. sányó n sápírí v.n sárá n sàrā v
sárágbálá n
sàràkórómà v sárámà v sàràmā v
sàràmā v sárásárá a. sásā v sàsá a.
i
106
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
sàsànyó n sàsàmā v sásó n
sé n
sè conj.
adv.
prep. sèèfiì`@ v sé-élékímà n sèfìàpú n sè-fìbǒ n sé-fíyè n sèín v
sèìán-sèìánbó v sèìán-sèìánsó v
sé-íngó n sé-kárífíyè n sékē v séké n sèké v
sékéní n
sékí v.n sèkí n Sékíbǒ p.n. sékíbǒ n sékírí n sékíríbé-àyè n sélè excl.
sèlé v sèlẹd`íkì v sèleò`@kí a.n sèlèyé n sèlèmà a.v Sèlèmá p.n. sèlètí v sémbè adv. sèmà a.n.v sèmèní n.a. séngí v sèní v.n sènì adv. sènìbǒ n
SF
English gloss
distant place; abroad
to get aloof; to be afar off
evening; period close to night-fall
nation; clan; tribe
and, then, what; also used as auxiliary word ;to phrases e.g., sè nwọ bère meaning by the way?
used in the Infinitive Mood in elliptical statements e.g. 'Sé chúa i.e.' ọkị sé chúa meaning "take to put in" ("take" not usually expressed)
sé ótómā i.e., for instance, for example
to practise harlotry; to fornicate; whore
national sign or mark e.g. national flag
adulterers
harlot, prostitute, whore (also = amanwẹngi-erembò)
national food or cake
to send; to load in; to allow someone a lift; to shave; to give presents during dances or displays; to spray currency notes on performers coming in succession across a waterway or bridge in batches by means of ferry by boat, canoe, vehicle esp. during festivities
going in succession across a waterway or bridge in batches by means of ferry by boat, canoe vehicle, esp. during festivities
national wealth
national pledge
to place under; thus chúkúsékéyé (pad, tíbísékéyé (pillow))
time or period (Ogoloma dialect) (also = síkí)
to awaken; to arouse as of old sickness in the body or cough arousing lungs ailment
traditional group of recognized intelligent and respectable men who liaise with the common people for the chiefs, and with the chiefs for the king; a group of people responsible for the government of the people
dance
crocodile
family in Awolome Biri
dancer
the world
worldly things earthly things; also tòmkìrìẹè-àyé
expression used to ward off unimportant matter, or to condemn a person (slang)
to select; to choose
to examine
chosen; elect
something selected
separately selected from others
name of family in Okrika, living in Edereme Biri
to jubilate without control
not knowing that; incidentally
article or message sent; to send on errand
poor; not wealthy; needy
to slice e.g. cassava tuber into tapioca
to grow; to rise to increase; growth
and so; and then; so; then
elder; as senior person, pl. sènìàpú ()
fm
fm
107
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
sé-nímè n sèniò`$rú n sénísénímà adv. sénsénmà a.adv
sé-ópû n sèrèrē v sérí a. sérī v
Sétárí n séyéchín v sìi n.a. síi n sìá v
sían n sìbáráséímbásí v síbírí n sìbù`$fìmā n sìbù`$vínpìkì a. sìdùkòpákúmà v sìifáa-òjù n sìfúlā n sìgō v Sìkā p.n. síká n sìkákà n sìkákà
sìkákà-chìn n sìkī` v síkí n síkí n síkífámáká a. síkífámákábù`$ adv. síkímámgbà adv. síkíkíẹnyé n síkímá prep. sìkìmâ v sìkìmànyọ^ n síkínásíkíná adv. síkípù adv.
síkírī v sìkìrí v síkírī v síkítà n
síkō n sìkòmàsíkómá a.
SF
English gloss
national song; national anthem
age; age group; people belonging to an equal set of age
making the face pucker as with disdain
in little bits like showers of rain falling; also applied to newly cut hair growing, oil poured on sliced yam
national pride
to lean to; to lean on something
flowing as of tidal water
to skim, carefully removing dust floating on water; to dust slightly and carefully
patriotic society of an age-group; loving one's nation
to give heed to
sin; wrong doing; bad; evil
twenty in counting; also sí
to break off from loving one another, like husband and wife being no more on terms or two friends in dispute
veins, artery; rope or twine esp. that made from raffia
to be wantonly treacherous
crocodile, ‘alligator’
absolution
penitent
to confess
vile body
woo; curse against someone
to confess; to avow
family in Okrika, living in Adedeme Biri
sting-ray, Dasyatis margarita. cf. also àbàjìbàràbà
cotton tree with thorns
mast in a ship
tree or wood from cotton tree
to reject; forsake; renounce
time by the clock or period
bay; out into the open sea
immediate
immediately; forthwith
always
clock, watch, time keeper, (also = sòkiènyé)
except; unless
to give way; get aloof
abroad
as time goes on; eventually; time and again
thence; from that time (usually applied as cheekword with the prefix 'míọkù' i.e. from now upward)
to wash
fade; changing from its original colour
to rub or smear with some force; to massage
big drum with baritone tune, usually used in marking the tempo of the music produced by the set
caterpillar like lobsters
conical material used in decorating masquerade at the back of the waist (tùmò-ìmgbùsú)
not proper, of doubting nature; not well born
fm f
mi
f ms
108
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS sìkòròmá n
sìkòròmànyó n
sílílì n sílíngī v símā v símā v símbí v
sìmbī v
símé n sìmē v sìmèbǒsímébǒ a.n sìmégbámásó adv. símékpótó v sìméògbò adv. símésín v sìmètíbíyè n sìmètónbò$ n sìmèy^e n
sìmé n sìmìẹmìẹyé n sīn v sīn$ v sìnáìbìnànémíkùb n ìe
sinbarabu n sìndàkí a. sìndó v,exc
l. sìnè n sìngí n sìngí v síngílábòlìá n síngò n sínínì n sìnìní v
sìnìnìsíníní a. sìnìnī a.
sìnpákúmà v sìnwèngìkōn v siọ`$kụ^ abb.
sìpàràngá n sìpìrì n sírítítímà adv. sìsàyētélímà v
SF
English gloss
evil thought or plan against someone; bad feeling
place where bad things are deposited like the bad "bush" where sacrificial materials, dead bodies resulting from accidents, withcraft, sores etc. are deposited
shilling (<Eng.) also sílì, sílíngì
eating fufu, that is, rolling fufu balls and swallowing profusely
to destroy and to spoil intentionally; also sìmā
to sigh
to pull harder; to use a pole to pull by pushing the pole against the bed of the water underneath
to drown someone by pressing him into the water, denying him breathing
conception; being in family way
to stay; to sit down; to marry
everyone; all and sundry
everlasting; remaining for ever; eternal
to miscarry as of conception also símésó
while; in space of time
to commit abortion
dowry in money or kind
fiancée or fiancé; intended wife or husband
dowry
seat
underwear for women's gown [<Eng. chemise]
iniquity
to drink tea or soup
to remove
conscience
retrenchment (also = fìrìbûsó)
elastic; spontaneously expansive and flexible like pounded fufu or yam an expression to indicate sympathy for someone physically hurt or otherwise disturbed with worries; to take courage
noose
catfish
to slumber
moray eel, Muraenidae. with white and black colour segmentation shellfish found in sand bank; clam (bivalve)
velvet cloth
to slip (bûọ-sìnìní)
smooth; slippery; velvetine
cramp; lacking flow of blood in some part of the body; spasmodic; the muscle retracting, also ásémíní-míníbà
to bring out; to subtract
to transgress
abbreviation of the phrase 'siọ`$kú I, némíká?', a blaming tone on someone who ought to know the facts of an affair but poses not to know
lungs; lit. bad liver also fùfú
whitlow, okoọhịa (<Igbo) lit. bad bush
gushing sound of liquid (blood, water etc.) from a source (echoic)
to make restitution; to make amends for wrong or injury done by
f f f f
109
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
sísé v sísíbénè adv. sìsìkí n sìsìmā v
sìtéịnyé n. sìtèlìmàyé n
sìtìbì n sìtórúsékiè`$nmā v
sìtórúsékíénmábò n
$
sìtú n sìyè n sìyèbû-bûsírì v sìyèbûvínpìkī` v só v sò n só adv. sóò v sòàlàgbā n sóbéin a. sòbíe n sòbíengò n sóbó v sóbó v sòbùnó n sòdāchíenyó n sòdù`$pàrí n sòbùrùmô n sò-èlèkìmá n
sòfénì n Sòfìrí p.n.
sógbígbí adv. sógbìsìrí adv.
SF
English gloss
giving an equivalent compensation
rise, awake; get up
two days before yesterday or after tomorrow
bad moments; ill fated period; irregular period
to force oneself on another for responsibility, feeding, and shelter
to demand debt forcefully
the worst of all
propitiation bringing to a favourable and peaceful satisfactory condition
wickedness
to imagine or believe to be rightly chargeable with something wrong; to suspect
suspect
stew (<Eng.) also sùtú
vice; evil; whitlow
to eschew evil; to abstain from any evil or bad thing
to eschew evil
to go; move
sky; fate or fortune
too; also
to enter; initiate as member of a society
thunder; lightening
fully entered (also = sópàlí, sógbígbí)
heaven
heavenly treasure
to return; come back from a journey
to enter in as the door opens after knocking
clouds (also = sòtòrù mèngì) (lit. water of the atmosphere)
horizon
hailstone
mole on the human skin
natural sign e.g., rainbow on the sky; also unusually size of mole on the human skin or mark one is born with; birthmark (also = sònìmé) vulture (also = ìndú; ọdè`$lè)
work from heaven usually taken as name for "Godpower" i.e.; God's labour (also = Támúnókúrò or Òrákúrò)
fully entered or contained
fully entered; gone right through inside; to enter into a house completely
brownish crab found in light mangrove forest and waterside, believed never to release its victim when it bites, unless the weather thunders. thirty in counting
power from heaven or above
soldier (<Eng.)
occasional lazy, mood of a person as a result of (i) his wife's sexual indecency exercised on him (see éréméní-ìjìbàsò) (ii) guilty conscience (see íríásó); repercussion
to pick out from original body or container e.g. oyster from its shell; revealing hidden facts
time keeping instrument; clock or wrist watch (also = síkíkíẹnyé)
to pick or extract from original body or container (also = sókísín)
sògbúrúrù
sói sòìnyō sójà sókì
sókī
sòkìẹnyé sókípákúmà
nc
num. n
n
n
v
n v
110
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS sókírí v
sókìs n sókísín v
sókópí a. sókóró v.a. sòkòròmā v
sókú v Sòkú p.n.
sókúsíkí n sókúsíkíàlàlì n sókúsín v sókútólúnà v -sọ aff. sólī v
sòlòlō a. sómà v.a. sómá v. sòmā conj.
soò$māa v sòmásómá a.
sòmbī v sómû ph.w. sóngílī v sóngú n sóní conj. sònìmé n
sónío num. sónjú n
sónó num.
sónómì num. sònsōn a. sónyó n sópù (síọpù) n sòpsóp n
sópàlí a.
SF
English gloss
to find out hidden facts scrupulously; investigate thoroughly; to be solicitous about minute details
socks (<Eng.)
to pick out from the original container with pin or needle like the removal of periwinkle (ísám) from its shell
lifted high pointedly; titling out conspicuously from a point
to fall; to cast down; to become
usually refers to the moon or sun just before it comes to view; the clearing state of the sky before the moon or sun appears
to dig; to harvest
"juju" of separation or enmity invoked by a relation. An offended relative, not wishing continuity of the love link between him or her and his or her relative (sister, brother, children, parents, cousins, etc.) openly declares that the offender should no more have any link with the offended, even unto death. This declaration is known as the "juju", sòkú
harvesting period; harvest
harvest season; harvest; thanksgiving ceremony
to dig or scoop out
to bore a hole through digging
also. Agrees tonally with stem
to have the linking for another man's possession; to covet (also = dìkípùkòsòlí)
hanging; dangling
onward; forward; go ahead
do not enter; commanded not to enter
then; there upon; there and then (carefully used in the same sense as térè)
to make reference to someone by word (usually preceded with the auxiliary 'ókuěín' thus, 'ókuěín Ìisoò$mà (referring to me); 'ọkúẹín á sóọmáa' (referring to her etc.)
not proper; something not regular and not aborigin esp. as of birth of someone (also = sìkòmà-síkómá)
to squat
to go in; commanded to go in
to screw inside; to turn repeatedly inside; to find fault (idiomatic use) sardine, Sardinella spp. (cf. èkémbà)
too; also
heaven's mark; natural or original mark; birthmark; congenital mark on the body like mole (also = sò-èlèkímà)
six in counting
nautical mile arbitrarily reckoned from bends (capes) of either mangrove forest or river vegetation; nautical kilometre adapted
five in counting;
ants
seven in counting
irritating; scratchy; feeling uneasy; itching
porch; entrance
shop (<Eng.)
succulent fruit with white pulp and black seeds (<Eng. soursop) also chòchóp
tightly entered in full
111
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ sórìsórì
sóró sórówárí
sósà
sósà
sòsí sòsìkìmà sòtónyé sòtórù sówā sòwákám
sówú sówúbí
sóyé sū
súū súà(súwà)
súà (súyà) súa
sùbà sùká súkā
súkū
sùkúlù súlē sùlèsùlè
súlèsúlèmà
sùlùkú súmā súmāgbīn sùnā
súndúkú sùngùmá súnú súnúfúró
súnúnū
PoS SF
a.
nf n
n
n adv. adv. n
n
a.
n
n.
v.n.
n v
v.a. excl.
n v
n fg a.
v
v.a.
n
v v.a.
adv.
v.a. v
v
v
n v n n
v
English gloss
haphazardly done or said; anything said or performed with little care or not
red snapper, Lutjanus agennes (also àgbàrá)
isolated hut built on a dunghill or bush for a mad person, idiot or a patient with an infectiious disease
saucer (<Eng.)
phrase word, meaning if entered
perhaps; maybe; probably
particularly; especially; moreso
something planned by heaven i.e., God's plan (usually taken as name) atmosphere; sky
entered in excess; full and overflowing
lightning; that casual winking lightning that opens and closes without thunder also known as ámáìbàlàfámà
repercussion; some happening to cause results in the bad or negative sense
to fight in return for a past grievance or misunderstanding; to retaliate; vengeance
profit; gain
to soak; to immerse; to steam fresh fish, meat, etc., in order to preserve it
increase; risen in size e.g., bread loaf as it bakes; to swell up expression of forbidding anything evil; pronounce curse, wishing evil, failure etc. a parent to a child or master to his subject
roasted pieces of meat on stick (<Hausa)
to lodge complaint to someone with the intent to expect a redress and compromise
hooked spear mostly used in fishing
hooked
to hang on a hanger
increasing or doubling line of meshes in a net
to waver in behaviour; to be slippery or unsteady in decision; unsteady like a canoe with narrow keel
school (<Eng.)
to deride someone by openly hooting at him
hovering about in distress being embarrassed; moving here and there in quest of help when one is involved in trouble e.g., court case, death like a chained criminal having his legs dangling as he struggles under torture
entangled like fish in a net; soaked in a bog or mud or swamp
push; using force to move something steady
to push down a steady object e.g., a standing object or human being
to struggle by throwing oneself about; to be worried inwardly over an issue
hunchback with chest protrusion
to be in procession or recession; to form a single file; to be in line
cane
inside pith of cane when the outer material is removed
sickness which causes disorder of the stomach, setting unrest, frequent stooling, vomiting and sometimes developing to fainting-fit
to massage the body using ointment to smear part of the body or rub with strain
112
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS sùsàfítúrù n
sùtú n T,t
T,t
tā n táa excl.
tábā v tàbò$ n tàbó v tàbátàbàmà adv.
tábrítábrí a. táịntáịn a.
tákī v
tàkìtàkí a. tálá n tàlàbú a.n
tàlàtàlá a. tálí a. tàáló excl.
támátámátàmà adv. Támúnó n
Támúnóbérè n
támúnóbérédǔkób n ò$
támúnódíkíbáláfà a. támúnódǔkósímà v támúnó-ígb^e n támúnókíká a. támúnókpótí v támúnókpótíapù n támúnónémí a. tán v
tàán a. tàndà n
tándā v
SF
English gloss
leaven; leavened bread (biblical) stew (<Eng.) also sìtú
consonant, the twenty eighth letter of the Okrika alphabet
wife
expression to ward off an undesirable; term to check noise or to quell a child
to lick with the tongue
wife; married woman; spouse
to soak; to immerse or soak oneself in water
talking like a learner of a language; talking with a lisp; uttering words resembling each other
too fond of making speech before any other in a gathering; forward in behaviour; officious; retortive
trembling; palpitating
to attach or place at a tip of something like cloth; to append something to another, leaving it dangling like epaulet on the soldiers of high military officers
untidy; rough; slipshod; disorderly; unkempt (adv.) tàkìtàkìmá
yeast
extraordinary; awkward; queer in looking e.g., with any inanimate thing or structure like extra large paddle; wear; oversize, etc.
scattered and disorderly like unkempt hair
neatly projecting out; to be turgid and erect
term in the dub-game; as the pursuer pursues the runner, he who quickly reaches the co-ordinator, registers and declares his escape by dubbing the co-ordinator with the shout 'taalo' that is, I register my refuge; a moon light game for children
rushing out to check and disturb an incoming person; intercepting the furious incomer
God Almighty
Godly, religion; divine ways of God; religion; worshipping of God service of God
evangelist; preacher
devout; pious; devoted
to speak impiously or irreverently of God; to blaspheme
ark of God
Godly; divine; God-like
to dissemble; speak or act hypocritically
dissemblers; pretenders; fanatics
religious; pious; devoted
to collect and carry off to throw away as of refuse; also to paint; to smear as oil on wound
satisfied; contended
elevated seat prepared to display the body of a dead man who in his life time maintained respectable fame as a warrior, or a wealthy Chief, or a patriot
to clear or take burning coal or cinder from the hearth with the purpose
113
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
tánglítánglí a. tángbín v tànjí v tànjìsábá v
U,u U,u
úù excl. uuu excl.
ùbé n U@kù p.n. úkùà n Ùrírì p.n.
Ụ, ụ ụ ùkpákàlá n
Vv V,v
váá id.
váì id.
váín id. vákī v vàámá a.adv
vápùvápù id. vélì n
vévé a.
vévé-kìrì n vìá a. vîn n vínvìn adv. vínpìkí v vínpìkìkúbíe(m$gb n
òlù)
ví'ní a. víópù id.
víopúmàpòkó v
SF
English gloss
of kindling fire
thin; tiny; lanky
to remove and throw away (<Ijọ) (also = tánwúkúmà) to climb; to ascend
to cross by climbing a bridge
vowels, the twenty-ninth and thirtieth letters of the Okrika alphabet pronounced oo as in fool, is an expression of derisive hooting made on someone who performs a shameful act in the public e.g. a thief caught in public
?
native pear (<Igbo) family in Abua in ALGA rice fruit (<Igbo)
family in KELGA
oil bean (<Igbo)
consonant, the thirty first letter of the Okrika alphabet
expressing the tear of cloth (echoic); splash of water dashed on something or someone
splashing sound as of bailing water out of a boat or container (adv.) vàìmà; also dǔvàì
frying sound also as (v) indicating flow of money
to roll balls of fufu furiously
description of the brightness of light or colourful cloth, thus vàamábìá i.e. shining brightly
descriptive of the method of bailing water out of a sinking boat; quick removal of water from a boat with pàngà (bailer)
cloth known as velvet; smooth carpette stuff (<Eng.)
descriptive of the style of wearing cloth far down to touch the ground as overflowing, mostly peculiar to women's fashion
fishing-port
shining bright; clear with a spark
automatic wavering like light
wavering
to turn about instantly
penitent heart
clear and matching in colour
expression of a sudden removal of something from a tight substance or container like a cock of a bottle; a sudden breaking or cutting off from original body like a link in a chain, etc.; viopuma (adv.)
to cut off or break off suddenly from the parent body or stalk
fm fm
114
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS vò adv.
vòọ a. vódō v
vókóm$ excl.
vòkòmákòrì v.adv vòkòròvókóró a. vòmásàrā adv vòròkòtò id.
vòròvòròmá adv vú
SF
English gloss
pouring out something in quick release thus vòmásàrá; also, plenty overlapping, dangling like 'don' or women's dress worn below the ankle; loose dressing (also = vọdò&)
to eat voraciously and untidily
an expression describing the sudden burning or lighting of fire to catch fire suddenly, like gunpowder or petrol
loose as of wear e.g., oversize of dress or show
poured out in quick release; available in great quantity
descriptive of surrendering to a benefactor at his feet; sudden collapse; total purposeful fall like a soft material
pouring out of liquid in regular sequence like urine from its organ or wine from a bottle or leakage of pipe water
wavering; swinging here and there
descriptive of a big head, usually 'tíbí-vúkpà' (n) big, abnormal head ablong in shape
method of angling where a rope with a single hook is used in flinging any fish that gets itself entangled from the trapping point
moving in a straying manner as one under the influence of some evil spirit, being carried to places planlessly
passing in quick succession without break like operating machines in a factory
consonant, the thirty second letter of the Okrika alphabet
we
to rush to meet somebody (usually as auxiliary to an accompanying verb ‘mu' thus 'wáamú'
overflowing to pour out like beer or drink in a cup
to shake in a swinging manner from side to side like afloating a boat that is sinking; shaking or rocking in order to remove the water from a boat
to cast (net or lot) to throw any object to another; to swerve to another side
unsteady, moving here and there
glistening; sparkling; shining brightly
dazzling and piercing in the eye
to gush out as blood from artery or water from a spring
to scratch roughly; to extort or grab
expression generally used after verbs to confirm the force of the verb e.g., 'ò' bò wárákà' (hope he came)
seizure by hand; grabbing like animals
coarse; porous; like dry gari
house; home
inside of house
the end of the eave of a roof
gecko
door; refuge
corner of a house
waiting or sitting room or drawing room of a building
rats and mice in a house
vúkpà a. vúkúmà n fg vúumà id. vûvûmà id.
W,w
W,w
wá pron. wáā v.a.
wákā v wákì v
wàlàlàwálálá id. wánánìwánánì id. wáníní id. wápákábá v wárā v wárákà adv
wárám$ n
wàràwàrá a. wárī n wáríbíe n wáríálágá n wárí'bō n wáríbò$kò n wáríkòlì n wáríkúbù n wárímángíayé n
115
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS wárínwéngí v
wárínwéngírú n
wárítōn v wásā v wàsàlā a. wásámā v wátáwátá a. wàwā a.v wòwō n
wàyó n wée a.v wéẹ a.v
wèkéréngè adv wèkéréré adv wéléemà adv wéléwélé a. wéréwéré a. wérí v wérípákábó v wérísó v wíkì n wíkì n wílíwílí a. wìrìkíwìrìkí a. wísùlù n wóō v wóọ excl. wófù n wókī v
wókókò adv wòkòló a. wókówókó a. wòkùmà v wálī v
wólō v wòlògí n.a. wólólō v.a. wòlòmā v wólómásín v wòrí v wòrìnìmé v wórō v wòrō a. wórōpákúmà v
SF
English gloss
to ask for someone's hand in marriage
drink offered during the wooing period of a fiancé to the parents of the fiance. This is done before the marriage ceremonies take shape. It is known as 'bòkọ gbolo ye' i.e.; something denoting a tap at the door, something requesting the hands of somebody
to make bequeathal plans of a late person's property; to bequeath
to scatter or spread
extra wide as of ears
to spread information or news or anything that can be handled
full to the brim
reduced esp. in body; emaciate
membrane; fluid that bursts out before a woman delivers a child during labour
cheating (<Yor.)
wavering to this way and that way; unsteady; double dealing
splashing of foam caused by the waves of the ocean or paddling effect; over flowing foam running over a cup or soup pot
not quite long; just now also ewekerenge
now then; then; at this time; it is then
distantly; being at good space; wide or quite apart
flippant of tongue beating tales etc.
gushing out arising from spilling any liquid-oil, kerosene, petrol etc.
to keep; to retain
to come about
to leave off; to spare; to forego or forgive
wick (<Eng.)
week (<Eng.)
descriptive of fast, deep colouring like ebony black, indigo etc. vesatious; disputatious; vexing repeatedly; adv. wìrìkíwìrìkímà
whistle (<Eng.)
to awaken from sleep
shout of noise
wharf (<Eng.)
to disturb orderly packed things by scattering them as a result of searching; searching for pieces of some materials food, cloth, etc.
act of seizure with force or gread; total grapping (also = gbúkúkù) spoilt; disfigured; appearing flimsy
echoing in the ear
to throw away
to cut or break a long material into a short one; to break into small pieces or segments e.g. sugarcane into pieces
to insult somebody; frequently touching some material or object confused state; in a jumbled situation
to put up a magnificent building (also = bólólō)
mixed; diluted; mutilated
to deface; to erase or dust off; blot out
abuse
reproach; abusive term
to draw out; to remove from a group, marsh or substance or hole reduced by emaciation
to draw out from a container like sword from its sheath or feather from the body of a bird
116
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS wósísémà v
wóróró adv.
wóómà adv wówó a. wú pron.
wúbé n wùkùmá v
wùlé excl. wúlū a.
wùrùwúrú a.n wùsàwùsàmá adv
Y,y Y,y
yà excl.
wàá n.v yàbée n
yàabò$ n
yàmáa n yámínímà adv. yàngá n.a. yángírí v.a.
yárírí a. Yàsí excl.
yáú (yáwú) a. yáúmà adv yāwô excl. Yāwótô excl. yàwúyàwú a. yáyākóróró n
yáyàyá a. yāyô excl. yàyò n yàyòtòkú n
SF
English gloss
to awaken a sleeping person; to revive an affair at its moribund state entering successively into a container through a spout or mouth or passage
shouting or echoing continuously
echoing
it. used for lower animals and inanimate or household objects masquerade (<ówu)
short form of ówube the mask; also used casually for 'type of cloth' or anything; that thing
to throw away
expression of condemnation and abuse; term following a look down on somebody or something (colloq.)
spoilt; changed to a bad condition; unrealistic
unsteady; deceitful and pliable in behaviour; also sand the smallest type of gravel or pebble
growing precociously; fast in developing
consonant, the thirty-third letter of the Okrika alphabet
exclamation esp. of greeting, denoting 'hi'; derisive expression to call the attention of someone of lower rank,
also applied to a familiar person or an equal or friend,, also, yàyà or yàyàyà
highest form of marriage in the culture of Okrika (see Appendix III) vocative address, calling the attention of a male friend or an equal or lower person; a casual call
woman married by the yaa system; a lawfully married woman in whose marriage the ceremonial custom of Ókuru' (raffia cloth) and íkpo' (Kano cloth) with other accompanying things like 'real-india' (injiri) cloth, money and drinks are adopted
feminine of 'yabee'
quietly; calmly; unnoticed
appearing well clad and pretentiously showy (<Pidgin)
to roll and twist as a result of being restless as caused by over-feeding or irritation like the behaviour of a snake after swallowing some creature or being smeared with petrol
erect; straight; upright; clear in standing order or growth
expression made to drive away domestic animals like fowls, goat etc. (<from yasikima)
quiet; calm; silent
quietly; silently
exclamation of expressing surprise and fear (short form of 'yawoto') exclamation denoting surprise
softly crisp and coarse in the mouth like fairly ripe pawpaw army-worm, brownish destructive creature that attacks crops in the farm
disorderly; unsteady; scattered
same as yawoto exclamation expressing surprise
son of a parent
paternal grandson; little son of a parent
117
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS yé pron.
yée excl.
yéè v yéábálá v yébá v
yébárásō n yébárì v yébárí n yébé v
yébé v
yébíbárá n yébíbǒ n yébíofórí a. yébín v yébó v yébǔ v yébû prep. yébûòkòrō a. yébûkùró a. yébûkùròapú n yébûlòkòkòkó a. yébûósò a. yébûsóká a. yéchín v yéchúa n. yéchúa v yéchúọ v yéchúọwárí n yédá v yédá v yédágíẹn$ yédágíẹnmásínì n yédáókí v yédáwó v yédáwónémì v yédé v yédé v yédérí v yédîi(yédǐi) a.v yédín v yédíe v
n yédíebǒ n yédíkí v yédíkíyé n yédǒkí v yédórí v yédǔ v
SF
English gloss
it; thing; something
stammering expression used unconsciously while thinking to say something
do; lot; allow it to be; grant that; cause it to be
to be mindful of something; to consider something
to break something; capable of dyeing or staining something; to kill something
prosperity
to repeat; do again
multiplication in maths
to say something; to be fond of talking or insinuating; uttering; gossiping
to ask for something; to enquire or consult the oracles of a god at a shrine
supplication
consultant
empty; desolate (also = yébíesìmèkà)
to pick up something
to dab; to touch or hold for firmness or security
to smoke or drink something
of something; pertaining to something
being satisfied with some explanation; comprehensive
to be in need; lacking funds
the needy; people in want
bountiful; abundant
being annoyed
vain; worthless; valueless; not important
to name; to invoke; to ascribe
addition in maths
to add or increase something
to cook something
kitchen (also = yechuò-nyọ)
to help put down load; to focus; to point or face
to imitate something; to entrap
to copy
xerox, photocopier; photostat machine; also yedachụa-masini
to receive or accept something
to learn something
to acquire knowledge
to drive something; to exorcise as of a medicine man or charmer
to spread things as for sale or show
to sell something
to know how to do or perform; capable of doing
to disguise; to change something into another form
to share something; to teach
division in maths
teacher
to look on
telescope, magnifying glass (also tórúdíkíyé)
to find or look for something
to weave something
to bail something e.g. using a spoon or cup to remove liquid (soup or
118
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
yédǔkó v yédûkó v yéfā a. yéfámá v
yéfé v.n yéfị^ v yéfíbàrà n yéfín v.n yéfóị v.n yéfúrú v.n yégálágálámá v yégíẹn v yégíẹn-másíní n yégó v yégósè n.ad
v yégúa v yégúó v yégbáná v yégbánámá v yégbánáyé n yégbání v yégbélá v yégbín v yégbín-másínì n yégbínbǒ n yégbé v yégbó v
Yéì excl. yéìbìpírì a.n
yéígbání v yéíkásí v yéínémá v yéínémábíebù n yéíní v yéjí v yéjíké v yéjínía v yékáịn v yékáinbō v yékáká v
yékán v yékárí v yékéịn v
yékíẹn v yékíkí v
SF
English gloss
water). Idiomatically applied to mean making much profit; profiteering to tell or speak; to engage in telling something; to discuss
to chew something
something being lost or being finished
to lose something; finishing or settling or resolving an issue; to waste or spend something esp. making expenses
buying something
eating something
how to eat
jumping something
roasting; to roast
stealing; to steal
to scatter things; to set confusion; to cause disagreement to write
typewriter
to read or name something
on account of something because of; reason
to mix something; to make some concoction
to cure or treat some ailment
to add something; to put something on top
to add more; to bid higher in auction sale; to make better offer shelf; cupboard
to make demands
to inquire about something; to seek information; to consult the oracles to throw something at; to mend or sew
sewing machine
person who mends or sews; tailor or seamstress
to invoke something; to invoke evil spirit against someone
to peck as does a bird or fowl; to strike as with a pointed instrument; also to roll 'fufu' and dip into soup and swallowing
O, oh! Shout of exclamation for being surprised at something prosperous; progressing in endeavours; prosperity (also = yétórókómún$)
to demand something
to lock something; to prevent from action
to endure or bear something
long suffering; long and patient endurance (Biblical)
to smell or sense some odour
to offload something; also, to load on
to shake something
to strife; to drag an issue on
to pluck something e.g. fruit from a tree or plant
to understand; to be able to comprehend something
to tie or prepare or parcel something; to brain-wash someone with some plan of evil intention
to set confusion; to tear something
to pray; to invoke; to plead; to curse
to print or make a drawing of something; to make a painting of some article work
to count by numbering
to stop or prevent
119
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
yékín v yékón v yékónfī v yékónmá v
yékón-ókí v
yékókó v yékún v yékpá v yékpákpá v yékpákpù v yékpátú v yékpọ^ v yélá a. yéláká a. yémá n
v yémíẹ v yémíẹbárá n yémíẹbárábéòlòkò n yémíẹkúrámà v
yémíẹkúrómà v yénémì a. yénémíkàbò$ n yèngìbò$ n yénúnúa v.a. yényáná v.a. yé-óbólómáyé n yé-ófó v yé-ófóịn v yé-ófórí n yé-ókí v yé-óló v yéótómáyé n yépákúmá a. yépéí v
yépélé v yépíkí v yépíkí v yépó v yépókí v yépókó v
yépókó v yépú v yèríyèrí a.
yésákí v
SF
English gloss
to extract something
to accumulate or acquire something or wealth
to do business and live by it; to earn a living by being in an occupation to serve someone economically; to live with a master or mistress, rendering to him or her all that one realises by trade; to practise feudalism
to be independent; to start serving oneself after rendering services to a master
to save or keep under safe condition
to have or make a good catch as in a fishing trip
to take good care of something; saving it
to remove the outer coat of something metallic
to hold something tight, avoiding anybody, noticing it; to pilfer
to fasten together; to clinch
to tie something
valuable; to be costly
cheap; unworthy
things
don't do
to do something
behaviour
precepts
to plan things agreeably and in good order; to make or arrange things accordingly
to arrange things firmly; to confirm plans
wise, sensible clever
idiot, fool, twit, stupid person, blockhead
mother; also nyèngìbò$
to drag issues; to argue; to be disputatious
to own something
gum, glue
to investigate something secretly; to research
to seize something; to be rapacious
zero; nothing
to take something
to hold something; to be wealthy; to be rich
analogy
fruitful; fertile; prolific; productive
to eat fish, meat or insects (specially applied to this class of protein food)
to cut something; to finish or decide something
to deny something
to turn something
to castrate or remove the inner part like the testickles
to listen to something
to pick out something from the ground or the body like picking out jigger
to remove from a stalk
to break or split something
transparent; inflamed appearance of the skin caused by burn or scald or boil
to start something
120
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS
yésárá v yésénwènìlàmà v yésín v yésín v yésókírí v
yésú v yésúká v yésúkáyé n yésún v yétábá v yétábó v yétán v yétéké v yétékébárá n yétélímá v yétéré v
yétíbí n yétókúrú v yétón v yétónyé n yétórókōmûn n yétúndú v yéwókí v
yéwólí v yéwól ó v yéwólómá v yéyée v yèyéé excl. yì v.n yía excl.
yìbàlàbálà n yìbò$ n
yìbǒ-ófóríkátókù n yìkàbò^ n yìkìkī v.n
yìlá n Yīró p.n.
yàngá n yòngó v
yòngòrò n
yónī a. yóríyórí a.
SF
English gloss
to pour something
to hurt some people or someone
to remove or subtract something (n) subtraction in Maths
to accomplish or finish (also = mìẹsín
to be interested to know details of things; to argue or persist with issues of minute points or details
to steam or parboil something like fresh fish or meat
to hang something
hanger
to stretch something
to pass the tongue over the surface of something; to lick
to soak something
to collect things with the intention of carrying them off; also yétánsín to worship things; to beg for something; to apologise; also yétékésín act of praying or worshiping; supplication (also = yébíbárá)
to effect repairing; to make things better; to refine something
to take good care of something feeble; to be particularly mindful of something
reason; main point; chief account of something; subject; cause
to chew something
to plan things; to measure; to survey; to forbid
measure; something for measuring like cup, rope, tape etc.
progress; prosperity
to drag chances or performances; to shirk duty on account of another to be fond of touching and disturbing and thereby disfiguring, mixing up and placing things disorderly
to cut or break something
to be fond of touching things; hands not kept steady
to be fond of mixing up things
to do something (also = yémíẹ)
of no value or importance (<Pidgin)
to bear a child; childbirth; parturition
expression to strike fear into someone; also in low accent into suspecting fear
labour; travail
one who delivers or brings forth a child; a nursing mother of a newly born babe
parentless child; orphan
barren woman
to stop childbirth; prevention of frequent delivery of child by applying contraceptives etc.; adoption of family planning methods to check childbirth; checking of childbirth
womb
name or title given to a son's wife by his parents and their relatives (also = tòkùtā
attitude of bluff; pride; showy attitude (<Pidgin)
to swagger stylishly; to swank; moving with neck and body calmly swinging; jerky in movement
mother belonging to him or her; also, nyògòrò or nyèngìbò$ (his or her mother)
reduced in size; lean; emaciated, (also= nyọnị)
crystal clear
121
Kirike dictionary Draft Levi Sika ed. Roger Blench
Kịrịkẹ PoS yórítítí a.
yú pron. yúbé pron. yúdē excl. yúnífòm n
Z, z
Z,z
záà id. zāmâ(zàámáà) adv.
zúáí id. zúáímà adv.
SF
English gloss
straight and austere; clearly straight like discharging without any disturbance or delivering a child without any hitch adv. yórítítímà usually applied to an elegant masquerade (yúbé)
referring to a particular masquerade, where the player is well known expression of joy and jubilation during masquerade display common dress; uniform worn by members of a society or group (<Eng.)
consonant, the thirty-fourth letter of the Okrika alphabet
expression denoting scattering
in a scattering manner e.g. occasion when a mad fellow scares a mob; also used as prefix to mean automatic departure e.g. to leave off instantly and arbitrarily
expression denoting sudden escape
vanishing from sight automatically
122
